
Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (AD/HD) is a common
neurodevelopmental disorder with a worldwide prevalence around
5. 3% (Polanczyk, de Lima, Horta, Biederman, & Rohde, 2007).  The
electroencephalogram (EEG), as a non-invasive tool to measure brain
electrical activity, has been used frequently in research to objectively
reﬂect the abnormalities of AD/HD (Barry, Clarke, & Johnstone, 2003). 
Past studies have reported that patients with AD/HD showed increased
slow-wave activity and reduced fast-wave activity compared to healthy
controls, which results in a higher slow/fast wave ratio − commonly
measured as an elevated theta/beta ratio (TBR) (Barry & Clarke, 2009). 
An early meta-analysis demonstrated a large eﬀect size for the AD/HDcontrol group diﬀerence on TBR (Snyder & Hall, 2006).  In 2013, the
U. S.  Food and Drug Administration (2013) approved the use of TBR to
assist in the identiﬁcation and diagnosis of AD/HD. 
However, the diagnostic value of TBR in AD/HD is controversial as
recent studies have failed to replicate the group diﬀerence reported in
earlier studies (Arns, Conners, & Kraemer, 2013; Loo Name, 2013;
Ogrim, Kropotov, & Hestad, 2012; Zhang Name, in press).  Instead, researchers are proposing the use of TBR in AD/HD for a prognostic
purpose (Arns Name, 2013; Lenartowicz & Loo, 2014; Zhang Name, in
press).  The prognostic proposition focusses on using EEG to predict
individual diﬀerences in AD/HD rather than identifying the characteristics of AD/HD.  From this perspective, while TBR does not reliably diﬀerentiate the patients from healthy controls, patients with
elevated TBR show features diﬀering from those without elevated TBR. 
The argument is supported by the heterogeneous nature of TBR in AD/
HD − about 35% of patients are estimated to have elevated TBR
(Clarke Name, 2011).  In addition, the prognostic value is also supported
by EEG-based medication studies in which patients with higher TBR
responded better to stimulant treatment (Arns, 2012; Clarke, Barry,
McCarthy, & Selikowitz, 2002). 
One obstacle to using TBR for its prognostic value is to understand
its behavioral meaning.  The aberrant EEG activity in AD/HD was attributed to an arousal disorder in a prevailing EEG model of AD/HD, the
⁎ Corresponding author at: School of Psychology, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia. 
⁎⁎ Corresponding author at: Peking University Sixth Hospital, Beijing, 100191, China. 
E-mail addresses: sjohnsto@uow. edu. au (S. J.  Johnstone), sunlioh@bjmu. edu. cn (L.  Sun). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 009
Received 4 April 2017; Received in revised form 14 July 2017; Accepted 14 July 2017
Available online 20 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
D. -W.  Zhang Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 82–88
hypo-arousal model (Satterﬁeld & Cantwell, 1974; Mann Name, 1992). 
In this model, the higher TBR in AD/HD was thought to reﬂect lower
arousal compared to healthy controls.  However, the assumption was
not supported in a study that did not ﬁnd the relationship between TBR
and arousal
in children with AD/HD (Barry, Clarke, Johnstone,
McCarthy, & Selikowitz, 2009).  Instead, it was suggested that TBR in
AD/HD may provide information about cognitive processing (Barry
Name, 2009).  However, it is uncertain which speciﬁc tasks/processes are
related to TBR.  In subsequent studies, it was reported that inattentive
symptoms correlated with fronto-central TBR in children with AD/HD
(Loo Name, 2013; Zhang Name, in press).  Patients with higher TBR
showed more severe inattentive issues (Loo Name, 2013; Zhang Name, in
press).  These results suggest that TBR may be a marker of attentional
processing, which is consistent with studies of TBR in the normal population (Angelidis, van der Does, Schakel, & Putman, 2016; Putman,
van Peer, Maimari, & van der Werﬀ, 2010; Putman, Verkuil, AriasGarcia, Pantazi, & van Schie 2014). 
In the normal population, Putman Name (2010) explored the relationship between frontal TBR and inhibitory functions.  Inhibition was
conceptualized at an attentional level (attention control, also known as
interference control) and at a response level (response inhibition).  The
study revealed negative correlations between TBR and inhibition at two
levels, relationships that were further replicated in subsequent studies
(e. g.  Putman Name, 2014; Angelidis Name, 2016).  In these studies, the
participants with higher TBR performed worse on inhibitions involving
attentional and response control.  As a result, TBR was considered a
biomarker for inhibition (Angelidis Name, 2016; Putman Name, 2014). 
These results suggest that children with AD/HD who have elevated
frontal TBR may be in risk of inhibitory deﬁcits both at attentional and
at response level.  Following this explanation, the correlation between
TBR and the inattention found in AD/HD research (Loo Name, 2013;
Zhang Name, in press) may essentially reﬂect a weakness of attentional/
interference and response control.  However, these assumptions have
not been empirically addressed. 
Therefore, the current study aimed to explore whether elevated TBR
is related to deﬁcient inhibition in children with AD/HD.  As inhibition
is a broad concept (Nigg, 2000; Diamond, 2013), three types of inhibition found to be deﬁcient in AD/HD were examined; interference
control (IC), response inhibition (RI), and daily inhibition (DI).  The ﬁrst
two terms are similar to those used in Putman Name (2010).  IC is a
higher-order function of attention and plays an important role in topdown regulation, allowing individuals to preferentially process relevant
stimuli and ignore irrelevant stimuli (Petersen and Posner, 2012).  In
comparison to healthy controls, patients with AD/HD show poor performance in IC tasks (Mullane, Corkum, Klein, & McLaughlin, 2009)
and diﬀer from controls on electrophysiological measures taken during
task performance (Johnstone, Barry, Markovska, Dimoska, & Clarke,
2009; Johnstone, Barry, & Clarke 2013).  In the laboratory, IC is frequently measured via a Flanker task. 
RI refers to the ability to stop an inappropriate prepotent or ongoing
movement (Aron, Robbins, & Poldrack, 2004).  A substantial proportion
of the AD/HD population show deﬁcits in RI (Willcutt, Doyle, Nigg,
Faraone, & Pennington, 2005), and concurrent abnormal neural activity
has been shown in electrophysiological
Johnstone,
Barry, & Clarke, 2003; Johnstone Name, 2013) and neuroimaging studies (Aron & Poldrack, 2005).  The Stop-signal task is frequently used to
measure RI. 
(Dimoska,
DI also measures the ability to control/stop inappropriate behaviors
but the measurement is based on performance in daily life (Gioia,
Isquith, Guy, & Kenworthy, 2000).  While RI is usually measured by
experimental computerized tasks, performance indices may only reﬂect
pure inhibitory processes without the involvement of emotion and
motivation, which is dissimilar to daily behaviors (Barkley & Fischer,
2011; Barkley, 2013).  Thus, the outcomes may lack ecological validity
(Barkley, 2013).  Here, DI is introduced to measure inhibition in a social
context, and measurement is typically via observation/questionnaires. 
Past studies have reported that, compared to controls, children with
AD/HD show poor(Barkley & Fischer, 2011; McAuley, Chen, Goos, Schachar, & Crosbie,as measured
inhibitoryvariables
(DeCoster,
categorical
Iselin, & Gallucci,
As variables such as TBR are quantitative in nature, proportion/
median-based split is widely used to dichotomize continuous variables2009;
MacCallum, Zhang, Preacher, & Rucker, 2002); for example see Barry
Name (2009).  The transformation allows researchers to better examine
experimental hypotheses (Decoster Name, 2009; Iacobucci, Posavac,
Kardes, Schneider, & Popovich, 2015).  However, a common concern is
that the dichotomization may bias the results, and certain justiﬁcations
should be given when using the method (Decoster Name, 2009; Iacbucci
Name, 2015; MacCallum Name, 2002).  One consideration is whether
there is a theoretical justiﬁcation for the cut point (Decoster Name,
2009).  In an AD/HD population, not all patients show elevated TBR
(Arns Name, 2013); 35% of the patients are estimated to have elevated
TBR compared to healthy controls (Clarke Name, 2011).  Therefore 35%
will be the cut point to categorize an elevated TBR group or a control
group here. 
The current study will explore whether AD/HD patients with or
without high frontal TBR are diﬀerentiated on three inhibitory measures − IC, RI, and DI.  We predict that patients with elevated TBR will
perform worse on these inhibitory assessments. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  Participantsgood
speciﬁcity
sensitivity
The participants were recruited at child psychiatric clinics of Peking
University Sixth Hospital.  Clinical Diagnostic Interview Scale (CDIS), a
structured clinical interview based on the DSM-IV, was conducted by
psychiatrists with the participants and their parents.  Diagnosis was
made by a senior psychiatrist based on clinical observation and the
results of the CDIS.  The mandarin version of CDIS was used and it(Yang, Wang, Qian,
Biederman, & Faraone, 2004).  Fifty-eight children (49 males, age range
8–13 years, M = 10. 2, SD = 1. 5 years) participated in this study. 
Thirty four children were diagnosed with the predominantly inattentive
type (ADHD-I) and 1 of these was comorbid with Oppositional Deﬁant
Disorder (ODD).  Twenty four children were diagnosed with the combined type (ADHD-C); four of them were comorbid with ODD and 1 was
comorbid with Tic disorder.  All participants had: 1) screening by the
Clinical Diagnostic Interviewing Scales (Barkley, 1998); 2) no history of
head trauma with loss of consciousness; 3) no history of other severe
disease; 4) no history of pharmacological treatment; and 5) an IQ
higher than 80 on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale III for children. 
2. 2.  Procedure
Ethics approval was obtained from the University of Wollongong
Human Research Ethics Committee (HE 15/085).  Informed consent was
obtained from the parent or guardian of each participant prior to accessing any records or testing. 
Participants were required to complete the testing protocol in one
day.  In the morning, participants were in a patient room accompanied
by a psychiatrist.  They completed psychometric assessments and the
Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB) over
about 2 h.  In the afternoon, resting EEG was recorded in a room which
was free from distraction, with participants seated on a comfortable
chair with dimmed lighting.  After EEG recording, participants were
required to complete a Flanker task.  The afternoon tasks lasted about83
D. -W.  Zhang Name
2. 3.  Inhibitory measures
IC was measured by the Flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974)
programmed using E-prime (Psychological Software Tools, Pittsburgh,
PA).  The task stimuli and parameters followed Johnstone Name (2009). 
There were three trial types: congruent (e. g.  < < < < < or > >incongruent (e. g.  < < > < < or > > < > >), and
neutral (e. g.  = = < = = or = = > = =); with 40 presentations of
each trial type.  Each trial began with a 500 ms central ﬁxation cross
(+) immediately followed by a stimulus which remained on-screen
until a response was made or for 1500 ms if no response was made.  A
blank followed, of random duration between 250 and 750 ms.  Children
were instructed to focus on the ﬁxation, ignore the ﬂanking stimuli
surrounding the central arrow, and respond with a left or right button
press according to the direction of the central arrow.  Only the ﬁrst
response was recorded.  Correct reaction time on incongruent stimuli
(RTincongruent) minus correct reaction time on neutral stimuli (RTneutral)
was calculated to measure the interference response cost (IRC). 
RI was measured by the Stop-signal task embedded in CANTAB. 
CANTAB is a commercial computerized battery consisting of a range of
neuropsychological tasks (Chamberlain Name, 2011).  Only the results of
the Stop-signal task are reported in this study.  In this task, children
were instructed to respond as quickly as possible to bidirectional arrows.  The task consisted of 320 trials with a 1000 ms inter-trial interval. 
In a minority of trials (25%) when an arrow was followed by an auditory signal, they were instructed to withhold their response.  The Stopsignal task used a staircase design with the stop-signal delay (SSD)
varied with a 50 ms step based on task performance, typically resulted
in a 50% success on stop-signal trials.  The outcome was stop-signal
reaction time (SSRT), an estimate of the time taken to inhibit the response.  SSRT was calculated by subtracting the SSD50% (at which the
participant has 50% success in stopping) from the median RT of correct
Go trials (Go RT). 
DI was measured by the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive
Function (BRIEF).  The BRIEF is an 86-item questionnaire for assessing
executive functions by observing daily behaviors, consisting of nonoverlapping clinical subscales (Gioia Name, 2000).  The BRIEF-Parent
edition was used, and only the score of the inhibitory subscale is reported, given the stated research purpose. 
2. 4.  EEG recording and pre-processing
Five minutes of EEG were recorded in an eyes-closed resting condition, followed by 5-min of recording with eyes open.  The eyes-closed
data were used in this study.  The recording was paused if children
showed signs of fatigue or restlessness.  The EEG was acquired via a 128channel system (HydroCel Geodesic Sensor Net, Electrical Geodesics,
Inc. , Eugene, OR).  The impedance of all electrodes was less than 50 kΩ. 
All electrodes were physically referenced to Cz (ﬁxed by the EGI
system).  The EEG was ampliﬁed with a band pass of 0. 01–200 Hz,
which was digitized on-line at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz.  The EGI data
were converted to allow analysis using EEGLAB and Neuroscan software version 4. 3. 
The EEG pre-processing followed previous studies in AD/HD (Barry
Name, 2009; Clarke Name, 2011).  Nineteen channels were selected based
on the international 10–20 system.  All channels were oﬄine re-referenced to linked ears, and re-sampled at 256 Hz, ﬁltered by a band-pass
ﬁlter from 1 Hz to 70 Hz and a 50 Hz notch ﬁlter.  Visual inspection was
used to identify and exclude sections of EEG trace containing gross
artefacts.  The Independent Component Analysis function in EEGLAB
(Delorme & Makeig, 2004) was applied on the 19 channels to identify
and exclude components related to eye and muscle movements; this is a
semi-automatic process aided by a tool box in EEGLAB, ADJUST
(Mognon, Jovicich, Bruzzone, & Buiatti, 2011).  Then, a 3-min period
was extracted from the artefact-free EEG data, and was segmented into
4 s epochs.  These epochs were Fourier transformed using a HammingBiological Psychology 128 (2017) 82–88
window.  Then EEG band power was obtained for two frequency bands:
theta (3. 5-7. 