
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a serious illness that aﬄicts up
to 10% of the adult population in the United States and represents one
of the leading causes of disability around the world [1].  With an estimated lifetime prevalence of more than 3. 5% in China [2], it is predicted to become the second leading cause of disability by the year
2020 [3].  Aside from mortality associated with suicide, depressed patients are more likely to develop cardiovascular disease and type 2
diabetes than non-depressed patients [4]. 
Current treatments of MDD are based on improving clinical symptoms, such as low spirits, lack of lucidity, activity decline, and some
somatic symptoms.  Several eﬀective treatments for depressed patients
have been established, such as cognitive therapy [5], interpersonal
therapy [6], electroconvulsive therapy [7], electrical stimulation of the
vagus nerve [8], and pharmacotherapy with antidepressants.  Drug
therapy is currently the ﬁrst-line treatment.  Many antidepressants have
been approved for the treatment of MDD, such as selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, and norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake inhibitors.  The
main SNRIs are duloxetine and venlafaxine [9].  Venlafaxine is a secondgeneration antidepressant that is widely used in a clinical context [10]. 
It can signiﬁcantly improve the clinical symptoms of patients with depression and its antidepressant eﬀects have been studied by our team
[11].  However, the molecular mechanism underlying its rapid antidepressant actions is unclear. 
The hippocampus is a major component of the brain in humans, and
it is an important part of the emotional center.  It is associated with a
variety of aﬀective disorders, and has therefore frequently been used as
a model system for neurophysiological studies.  Previous studies revealed that exposure to stressful experiences decreased proliferation
and neurogenesis in the hippocampus of adult animals [12,13], with
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 402460, China. 
E-mail address: xiepeng@cqmu. edu. cn (P.  Xie). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 011
Received 25 May 2017; Received in revised form 31 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 08 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
P.  Shen Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 63–70
these features being increased by chronic use of antidepressants
[13,14]. 
Metabolomics is the scientiﬁc study of chemical processes involving
metabolites.  It is also an approach frequently used in the study of the
pathogenesis of depression and the eﬀects of antidepressant drugs
[15–22].  Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS), combining
the advantage of the high separation capacity of chromatography with
the high discriminant characteristics of mass spectrometry, is ideal for
the separation, and qualitative and quantitative analyses of complex
mixed samples [23]. 
To explore the potential biological eﬀects of venlafaxine on mouse
hippocampus, we applied a non-targeted metabolomic approach based
on GC–MS technology to characterize the global metabolic proﬁle in
mouse hippocampus following the systemic administration of venlafaxine.  The diﬀerentially expressed metabolites were analyzed to create
molecular interaction networks and the core proteins BDNF, p-c-Raf, pMAPK, p-MEK, p-AKT, and CREB involved in these networks were validated by western blotting.  Our primary aims were to identify the
biological mechanisms underlying the eﬀects of venlafaxine and to
provide new ideas for future research on antidepressants. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Animals
Twenty healthy male C57BL/6J mice, aged 8 weeks old and
weighing 18–20 g, were purchased from the Laboratory Animal Center
of Chongqing Medical University (Chongqing, China).  During the entire
study, all of the experimental animals lived under simulated natural
light (12-h light/dark cycle), in an environment with optimal temperature (22 ± 1 °C) and appropriate humidity (50 ± 5%) with ad
libitum access to food and water.  All procedures in this study conformed to the National Institutes of Health’s Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals (revised 1996) [24], and the study was approved
by the Ethics Committee of Chongqing Medical University. 
analysis. 
2. 4.  GC–MS analysis
capillary
column (Agilent
GC–MS analysis was performed in accordance with a previous study
[16].  In brief, a GC 7890A/5975C system (Agilent Co. ) equipped with
an HP–5 ms
J & W Scientiﬁc Co. )
(30 m × 0. 25 mm × 0. 25 μm) was used.  A total of 0. 5 μL of derivative
was injected into the capillary column.  The temperatures of the injection port, the EI iron source, and the quadrupole rods were 280 °C,
230 °C, and 150 °C, respectively.  Helium gas (purity > 99. 999%) acted
as a carrier gas with a ﬂow rate of 6 mL/min.  The temperature of the
capillary column was kept at 70 °C for 2 min, increased to 160 °C at a
rate of 6 °C/min, elevated to 240 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min, increased to
300 °C at a higher rate of 20 °C/min, and then maintained at 300 °C for
6 min.  Mass spectrometry was performed in full scan mode and the
detection range was 50–600 (m/z). 
2. 5.  GC–MS data analysis
In this study, data preprocessing was carried out in the R software
platform, including baseline ﬁltering, peak identiﬁcation, integration,
retention time correction, peak alignment, and mass spectral fragmentation analysis.  Editing of data was performed after the analyses to
eliminate impurities from column loss and sample preparation in
Excel2010 software, and the ﬁnal results were converted to a 2D data
matrix.  This matrix included sample information, retention time, and
mass spectrometry data.  The normalized data matrix was imported into
the SIMCA-P 14. 1 software package (Umetrics AB, Umeå, Sweden). 
Orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) was
used to identify the metabolic diﬀerences between the groups.  Variable
important in projection (VIP) greater than 1 and p < 0. 05 were considered to indicate a signiﬁcant diﬀerence.  Seven-cycle interactive
veriﬁcation and the 200-response sequencing test method were used to
investigate the quality of the model. 
2. 2.  Animal treatment
2. 6.  Metabolic function analyses
All mice were randomly divided into a venlafaxine group (VLX
group) and a control group (CON group) after 1 week of adaptive
feeding.  The VLX group (n = 11) was intraperitoneally injected with
venlafaxine (Sigma-Aldrich, St.  Louis, MO, USA) diluted in normal
saline to a dose of 16 mg/kg (200 μL).  Meanwhile, the CON group
(n = 9) was intraperitoneally injected with normal saline (200 μL). 
This was performed daily between 8:00 A. M.  and 9:00 A. M.  for 14 days. 
Functional analyses of the metabolites that discriminated between
the groups were implemented using MetaboAnalyst 3. 0 [25].  MetaboAnalyst is a set of online tools for metabolomic data analysis and
interpretation, pathway analysis, and visualization [26].  Based on the
human metabolome database (HMDB) within this tool, the diﬀerential
metabolites were uploaded to a webpage using the MetaboAnalyst tool,
and the biological function of each metabolite was carefully analyzed. 
2. 3.  Sample preparation
2. 7.  Molecular pathway and network analyses
After being anesthetized with ether, all of the mice were quickly
decapitated.  Their brains were dissected on ice to obtain the hippocampus.  The hippocampus was then rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen
for 30 s and stored at −80 °C until analysis.  Before analysis, each frozen
hippocampus was homogenized by a tissue homogenizer (Jingxin
Technology, Shanghai, China) after adding 20 μL of internal standard
(l-2-chlorophenylalanine at 0. 03 mg/mL; Sigma Co. ) and 500 μL of
methanol–water–chloroform solution (5:2:2, v/v/v).  The mixture was
sonicated for 5 min, incubated for 20 min on ice, and then centrifuged
at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C.  A total of 300 μL of supernatant was
then transferred to a glass bottle for vacuum drying.  After adding 80 μL
of methoxyamine pyridine hydrochloride solution (15 mg/mL; Macklin
Co. ) to the dried extract and shaking it for 2 min, the oximation reaction was carried out at 37 °C for 90 min.  Subsequently, 80 μL of BSTFA
(1% TMCS) (Sigma Co. ) and 20 μL of normal hexane were added, followed by shaking for 2 min, after which the mixture was incubated for
60 min in an incubator at 70 °C.  After leaving the mixture to stand at
room temperature for 30 min, the derivative was prepared for GC–MS
At present, IPA is the most complete and accurate biomedical analysis software and database globally.  For comprehensive investigation
of the molecular network representing the metabolic diﬀerences in the
hippocampus between VLX and CON groups, the metabolite lists with
KEGG IDs, PUBCHE IDs, fold change, and p-value were uploaded onto
the IPA server.  Highly correlated molecular networks were generated in
the ingenuity pathway knowledge base.  Based on the degree of correlation between the metabolic diﬀerences and the network, a score was
generated.  The higher the score, the more relevant the network. 
2. 8.  Western blotting validation
Western blotting is a widely used analytical technique applied in the
ﬁeld of molecular biology to detect speciﬁc proteins in a sample of
tissue homogenate.  In this study, after electrophoresis, the proteins
were transferred to a membrane (polyvinylidene ﬂuoride: PVDF) where
they were stained with antibodies speciﬁc to the target protein [27,28]. 
The hippocampal tissue was fully reacted with RIPA solution containingP.  Shen Name
phosphatase inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) at 4 °C, processed by
ultrasound, and ﬁnally subjected to low-temperature centrifugation to
obtain the target protein.  The proteins in the sample were separated
using a 10%–12% SDS polyacrylamide gel, and then transferred to a
PVDF membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) for blocking.  Then, the
proteins were incubated with rabbit monoclonal anti-phospho-p44/
42MAPK (ERK1/2) (Cell Signaling, 1:1000), rabbit monoclonal antiphospho-c-Raf
rabbit monoclonal antiphospho-AKT (Cell Signaling, 1:3000), rabbit monoclonal anti-CREB
(Cell Signaling, 1:1000),
rabbit monoclonal anti-BDNF (Abcam,
1:2000), rabbit monoclonal anti-phospho-MEK (Cell Signaling, 1:2000),
mouse monoclonal anti-GAPDH (Bio-Rad, 1:12,000), mouse monoclonal anti-tubulin (Bio-Rad, 1:12,000), or rabbit monoclonal anti-βactin (Bio-Rad, 1:10,000) overnight at 4 °C and then incubated with
secondary anti-rabbit antibodies (1:10,000) for 2 h.  The signals were
visualized using an ECL kit (Millipore). 
(Cell Signaling, 1:1000),
2. 9.  Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses comparing the two groups were carried out
using IBM SPSS Statistics Version 21 (IBM Co. , USA).  The parametric
two-tailed Student’s t-test was applied to analyze the signiﬁcance of
diﬀerences between the two groups.  A p-value less than 0. 05 was
deemed to indicate statistical signiﬁcance. 
3.  Results
3. 1.  Metabolomic analysis
The total ion chromatogram of all samples showed a strong signal,
high peak capacity, and good reproducibility.  The internal standard
peaks and any known false positive peaks (including noise, column loss,
and derivative reagent peaks) were removed from the data matrix, and
then 229 individual peaks were detected in the VLX and CON groups,
which were used in the subsequent multivariate analysis.  The OPLS-DA
score plots also showed a clear diﬀerence between the two groups
(R2X = 0. 769, R2Y = 0. 989, Q2 = 0. 94) (Fig.  1A).  The robustness of
the model was investigated by the method of 200-response sequencing,
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 63–70
which showed that the model was robust and reliable (R2 = 0. 655,
Q2 = −0. 436) (Fig.  1B). 
3. 2.  Identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant metabolitesof
In the OPLS-DA analysis model, all of the metabolites with VIP
values > 1. 0 and p-values < 0. 05 regarding the diﬀerence between the
two groups were considered to be diﬀerential variables.  A total of 27
metabolites had signiﬁcant diﬀerences in expression between the VLX
and CON groups (18 decreased and 9 increased in the VLX group relative to the CON group) (Table 1).  The VLX group was characterized byL-dopa, O-phosphorylethanolamine, N-methyl-DL-alanine, aspartic acid, glycine, tyrosine,
noradrenaline, oxalic acid, N-acetyl-beta-alanine, urea, 2-aminoethanethiol, 1-methylhydantoin, alanine, L-malic acid, citric acid, and dehydroascorbic acid, in combination with higher levels of phosphate, Nacetyl-L-aspartic acid, D-(glycerol 1-phosphate), stearic acid, inosine,
palmitic acid, pyrophosphate, 4-aminobutyric acid, and L-4-hydroxyphenylglycine. 
asparagine,
glutamine,
3. 3.  Metabolic function analyses
All of the metabolites were uploaded to the MetaboAnalyst 3. 0 site,
and were then classiﬁed into three dominant categories regarding
biochemical functions using the HMAD database (Table 1).  These were
amino acid metabolism (urea, aspartic acid, N-methyl-DL-alanine,
glutamine, 4-aminobutyric acid, glycine, tyrosine, L-dopa, noradrenaline, N-acetyl-L-aspartic acid, alanine, asparagine, and N-acetyl-betaalanine), energy metabolism (1-methylhydantoin, pyrophosphate, Lmalic acid, citric acid, and phosphate), and lipid metabolism [D-(glycerol 1-phosphate), L-4-hydroxyphenylglycine, stearic acid, palmitic
acid, and O-phosphorylethanolamine], as well as other metabolism. 
3. 4.  Molecular network analysis in IPA
Lists of the 27 expressed metabolites (with PubChem and KEGG IDs)
were uploaded onto the IPA website (http://www. ingenuity. com) for
molecular interaction network analysis.  The most signiﬁcantly altered
Fig.  1.  Metabolomic analysis of hippocampal samples from venlafaxine-treated (VLX) and saline-treated (CON) mice.  Orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS–DA)
score plots between VLX and CON (A).  Statistical validation of the OPLS–DA model by permutation testing between VLX and CON (B).  Permutation tests (B) showed that the original R2
and Q2 values (top right) were signiﬁcantly higher than the corresponding permuted values (bottom left), demonstrating the robustness of the OPLS-DA model. P.  Shen Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 63–70All diﬀerential metabolites detected by GC–MS among VLX and CON groups. 
Metabolites
Metabolic pathwaysFold changea
VIPb score
t-test(p)4-aminobutyric acidasparagine
N-acetyl-L-aspartic acid
tyrosineglutamine
N-Acetyl-beta-alanine
aspartic acid
N-Methyl-DL-alaninenoradrenaline
phosphate
pyrophosphate
1-Methylhydantoin
L-Malic acid
citric acid
O-Phosphorylethanolamine
D-(glycerol 1-phosphate)
L-4-Hydroxyphenylglycine
stearic acid
palmitic acid
oxalic acid
Dehydroascorbic Acid
2-aminoethanethiolAmino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism
Energy metabolism
Energy metabolism
Energy metabolism
Energy metabolism
Energy metabolism
Lipid metabolism
Lipid metabolism
Lipid metabolism
Lipid metabolism
Lipid metabolismOtherOther142147731331167329911673299132103730. 690. 811. 090. 580. 670. 510. 622. 290. 860. 44/1. 230. 941. 1932. 511. 861. 261. 21. 037. 941. 961. 171. 471. 152. 291. 40. 0000. 0040. 0490. 0000. 0220. 0150. 0030. 0000. 0040. 0000. 0190. 0170. 0270. 002
a Values greater than 1 indicate higher levels in venlafaxine (VLX) group than in the control (CON) group; values less than 1 indicate higher levels in the CON group than in the VLXb Variable inﬂuence on projection (VIP) values of greater than 1. 0 and p-values of less than 0. 05 were deemed statistically signiﬁcant. /indicates that L-4-hydroxyphenylglycine was not
detected in the CON group. 
“Cell-to-Cell Signaling and Interaction, Molecular
network was
Transport, Small Molecule Biochemistry,” with a score of 47.  A total of
20 diﬀerent metabolites were included in the network (Fig.  2).  Using
the KEGG site to search for relevant metabolic pathways, two metabolic
pathways were found to be highly correlated with the diﬀerentially
expressed metabolites (MAPK–ERK1/2 and P13K–AKT signaling pathways).  The metabolic pathway containing diﬀerentially expressed metabolites and core proteins is shown in Fig.  3. 
3. 5.  Western blotting
Six proteins were selected for validation by western blotting in the
MAPK–ERK1/2 and P13K–AKT signaling pathways (Fig.  3).  The protein
expression
phospho-c-Raf,
phospho-AKT, CREB, phospho-MEK, phospho-MSK, and BDNF was
signiﬁcantly increased compared with that in the control group. 
<Conclusion> Discussion. 
Venlafaxine is a widely used antidepressant that mainly blocks
noradrenaline (NE) and simultaneously inhibits 5-hydroxytryptamine
(5-HT) reuptake [29] and weakly inhibits dopamine (DA) [9].  It can
increase the concentrations of NE and 5-HT, and has a dual antidepressant eﬀect.  The antidepressant eﬀects of venlafaxine have been
explored and behavioral tests analyzing them have been performed by
our team [11].  Although venlafaxine can signiﬁcantly improve the
clinical symptoms of depressed patients, the speciﬁc molecular pathways behind its antidepressant eﬀects are not clear.  Therefore, a GC–MS-based metabolomic approach coupled with western blotting validation was used to investigate the biological mechanisms of
venlafaxine. 
4. 1.  Metabolic function analyses
A set of 27 diﬀerentially expressed metabolites clearly distinguished
the VLX group from the CON group.  To further explore the potential
biological mechanisms involved in this, these metabolites were divided
into three distinct categories according to their biological functions: (1)
amino acid metabolism, (2) energy metabolism, and (3) lipid metabolism (Table 1). 
4. 1. 1.  Eﬀect of venlafaxine on amino acid metabolism
Among the biological functions, the most signiﬁcant changes were
in amino acid metabolism.  Except for 4-aminobutyric acid and N-acetylL-aspartic acid, most of the metabolites showed a trend for a low level of
expression.  Some of these were neurotransmitters (aspartic acid, 4aminobutyric acid, glycine, L-dopa, and noradrenaline).  Venlafaxine
has been referred to as a serotonin–norepinephrine–dopamine reuptake
inhibitor [30], and it can lower the levels of 5-HT, norepinephrine, and
dopamine.  In addition, tyrosine is one of the 20 standard amino acids
that are used by cells to synthesize proteins; it can translate dopamine
and norepinephrine through tyrosine hydroxylase.  As the levels of
tyrosine declined in our study, so did those of dopamine and norepinephrine.  Glutamic acid and glutamine can be converted into each
other by glutamine synthetase and glutaminase.  Glutamic acid can be
converted into alanine, aspartate, and α-ketoglutaric acid through
alanine aminotransferase.  Glycine can be converted into α-ketoglutaric
acid through joint deamination.  In our study, glutamine, alanine, aspartate, and glycine decreased in the VLX group, and in this group
protein consumption was greater than protein synthesis.  Our results
suggest that venlafaxine can speed up protein consumption.  A previous
study conﬁrmed that 4-aminobutyric acid (GABA) was reduced in a
model of depression and increased by antidepressant treatment [31]. 
This is the same conclusion that was reached in the current research. 
High levels of N-acetyl-L-aspartic acid (NAA) in the hippocampus are
related to better working memory performance in humans [32].  AP.  Shen Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 63–70
Fig.  2.  Networks associated with VLX treatment identiﬁed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.  Green represents a decreased expression level and red represents an increased one.  The darker
the color, the greater the change.  (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. )
Fig.  3.  Overview of the MAPK/ERK1/2 signal pathway and P13K-AKT signal pathway.  Solid arrow represents a direct correlation and dashed arrow represents an indirect correlation. 
(+p) represents phosphorylation.  The slash background represents proteins veriﬁed by western blotting. 
previous study found that the concentrations of NAA increased after
successful electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), indicating a probable neurotrophic eﬀect of ECT [33]. 
4. 1. 2.  Eﬀect of venlafaxine on energy metabolism
In our study, ﬁve metabolites indicated a signiﬁcant change in energy metabolism.  The levels of three metabolites (1-methylhydantoin,
L-malic acid, and citric acid) declined, while two metabolites (pyrophosphate and phosphate) rose.  Pyrophosphate is important67
P.  Shen Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 63–70
Fig.  4.  Six candidate proteins were selected for western blotting.  Expression of BDNF (p = 0. 047), P-C-Raf (p = 0. 019), MAPK (p = 0. 041), P-MEK (p = 0. 022), P-AKT (p = 0. 017), and
CREB (p = 0. 017) was signiﬁcantly increased in the VLX group compared with the level in the CON group. *p < 0. 05. 
biochemistry, and it is formed by the hydrolysis of ATP into AMP in
cells.  Upon the addition of 1-methylhydantoin (also known as N-methylimidazolidine-2,4-dione) [34], ATP can be hydrolyzed to produce
ADP and phosphate.  High levels of pyrophosphate and phosphate show
that energy metabolism was exuberant in our study.  Mitochondria are
an important site for aerobic oxidation, and a previous study found that
venlafaxine has beneﬁcial eﬀects on mitochondrial respiratory function
[35].  In biochemical reactions, malic acid can supply H+ for mitochondrial energy metabolism, and citric acid is an important material
in the Krebs cycle, which is an important feature of energy metabolism. 
The decreases of malic acid and citric acid showed that the energy
metabolism of brain tissue was more active in our study.  A previous
study revealed that malic acid and citric acid were expressed at low
levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of stress-resilient rats [17],
so the two substances may show a downward trend in mice treated with
antidepressants.  Under the eﬀect of venlafaxine, brain tissue consumes
more energy.  Depression is considered to be a disease of mitochondrial
energy metabolism and impaired energy metabolism in the brain. 
Psychotropic drug treatments can alter energy metabolism and may
aﬀect mitochondrial processes [36].  In our study, mice treated with
venlafaxine had higher energy metabolism.  This conclusion is in line
with the ﬁndings of former research. 
4. 1. 3.  Eﬀect of venlafaxine on lipid metabolism
Among these diﬀerential metabolites, ﬁve metabolites are related to
lipid metabolism.  Apart from a low level of O-phosphorylethanolamine,1-phosphate),
[D-(glycerolmetabolites
hydroxyphenylglycine, stearic acid, and palmitic acid] showed increasing trends.  These results indicate that vigorous lipid metabolism
was occurring.  A previous study revealed that antidepressant drugs
upregulate cholesterol and fatty acid in human glial cells [37].  This
suggests that antidepressants can activate lipid metabolism, which is
consistent with our results.  Phosphorylethanolamine is a phospholipid
composed of glycerol, fatty acid, phosphoric acid, and ethanolamine.  A
previous study revealed that the level of phosphorylethanolamine was
downregulated on astrocytes treated with venlafaxine [38].  When energy metabolism is particularly active, organisms can reduce the level
of phosphorylethanolamine synthesis, and phosphorylethanolamine
can be decomposed into a large number of glycerol, fatty acid, and
phosphoric acid molecules instead.  This glycerol can enter the Krebs
cycle for aerobic metabolism.  At the same time, catabolic processes
produce more fatty acid and phosphoric acid.  Our results were consistent with those of previous studies, i. e. , the level of phosphorylethanolamine showed a downward trend. 
4. 2.  Metabolism pathway analysis
All of the diﬀerentially expressed metabolites were submitted to
IPA, which generated metabolite–protein integrated network data
(Fig.  2).  This revealed that “Cell-to-Cell Signaling and Interaction,
Molecular Transport, Small Molecule Biochemistry” was the network
with the most signiﬁcant change between the VLX and CON groups.  By
an analysis of related protein pathways using the KEGG website (http://
www. genome. jp/kegg/), we identiﬁed two dominant protein pathwaysP.  Shen Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 63–70
related to the eﬀect of venlafaxine (MAPK–ERK1/2 and P13K–AKT
signaling pathways).  P-MAPK (ERK1/2), P-C-Raf, P-AKT, CREB, P-MEK,
and BDNF are their core proteins (Fig.  3), which was also veriﬁed by
western blotting. 
4. 2. 1.  Eﬀect of venlafaxine on MAPK–ERK1/2 signaling pathwayintensitythat
increased
venlafaxine
Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways are evolutionarily conserved, through which extracellular signals are processed into
intracellular responses.  These pathways reveal the role of MAPK–ERK1/
2 in the regulation of cell growth and cell cycle progression [39].  The
ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is an intracellular signaling cascade implicated in several forms of learning,
memory, and neuroplasticity [40,41].  Fig.  3 reveals that BDNF can
activate the phosphorylation of RAF-1, MEK, and ERK.  BDNF is a
member of the neurotrophin family of growth factors, helping to support the survival of neurons, and encourages the growth and diﬀerentiation of new neurons and synapses [42,43].  A previous study revealedimmunostaining in hippocampal pyramidal neurons [44].  The RAF-1
protein is part of the ERK1/2 pathway.  Increased levels of phosphorylated Raf-1 were found in stromal cells in SSRI-treated women [45]. 
Mitogen-activated protein kinase (also known as MEK) is a kinase enzyme that phosphorylates mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK).  A
previous study revealed that the expression of MEK protein was decreased in the prefrontal cortex in a chronic restraint stress mouse
model of depression, and it can be blocked by the antidepressant imipramine [46].  Extracellular regulated protein kinases (ERK1/2) can
promote the transcription and expression of some genes, and are closely
related to cell proliferation and diﬀerentiation.  Shannon Name reported
that antidepressants can restore pERK1/2 in the dentate gyrus after a
stress-related insult [47], and Briones Name discovered that venlafaxine
can increase phosphorylated ERK1/2 expression in the hippocampus
via a chronic mild stress procedure [48].  In this study, the protein expression in hippocampal tissue of mice treated with venlafaxine was
signiﬁcantly higher than that in the control group [BDNF, p-c-Raf, pMEK, and p44/42-MAPK (ERK1/2)] (Fig.  4).  Our results are consistent
with those of previous studies, demonstrating that the antidepressant
eﬀect of venlafaxine is highly related to activation of the MAPK
pathway. 
4. 2. 2.  Eﬀect of venlafaxine on the P13K–AKT signaling pathway
The PI3K-AKT pathway is an intracellular signaling pathway that is
important for regulation of the cell cycle.  Speciﬁcally, it is directly related to cellular quiescence, proliferation, cancer, and longevity [49]. 
The core proteins of this pathway are AKT and P13 K.  Protein kinase B
(AKT) plays an important role in cell survival and apoptosis.  Guo Name
reported that ﬂuoxetine stimulated the phosphorylation of AKT in the
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of wild-type mice [50].  In addition,
Wang Name found that venlafaxine protects PC12 cells against corticosterone-induced cell death by modulating the activity of the PI3 K/
Akt/FoxO3a pathway [51].  Lv Name also reported that venlafaxine increased AKT phosphorylation and the protective eﬀects of venlafaxine
were inhibited by PI3 K/AKT inhibitor in cultured human brain microvascular endothelial cells [52].  Mostany Name also revealed that an
increase in cytosolic AKT levels was observed in venlafaxine-treated
animals [53].  CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein) is a
cellular transcription factor.  It binds to certain DNA sequences called
cAMP response elements (CRE), thereby increasing or decreasing the
transcription of the downstream genes.  In our study, the p-AKT and
CREB protein expression in hippocampal tissue of mice treated with
venlafaxine was signiﬁcantly higher than that in the control group. 