
Psychosocial stressors such as being exposed to social evaluative
threat have repeatedly been shown to activate the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis which plays an important role linking stress
and inﬂammation.  Importantly, chronic exposure to stressful life circumstances is often accompanied by systemic low-grade inﬂammation
which constitutes an antecedent of stress-related disease (Rohleder,
2014), thus illustrating the importance of being able to cope eﬀectively
with everyday stress in order to anticipate adverse health outcomes.  In
light of these relationships, research has focused on coping styles or
traits to explain inter-individual diﬀerences in HPA axis regulation in
order to provide an explanatory approach for individual vulnerability
to pathophysiological consequences of repeated physiological stress
reactions. 
HPA axis activity during stress as characterized by a quick rise and
decline of glucocorticoid levels is thought to be adaptive in terms of
maintaining physiological stability when facing environmental demands.  As described by the allostatic load model (McEwen, 1998;
Sterling & Eyer, 1988) these allostatic processes have a potential cost to
the body, when regulated ineﬃciently or when repeated or chronic
stress requires adaptational reactions to be activated too frequently
(McEwen, 2000; McEwen & Stellar, 1993). 
On the one hand, associations between physiological stress responses and mental and physical health impairments such as major
depression (for a review, see Burke, Davis, Otte, & Mohr, 2005) or
chronic fatigue syndrome (for a review, see Tomas, Newton, & Watson,
2013) have been elucidated cross-sectionally, while prospective studies
revealing a direct path between heightened stress induced HPA axis
responses and disease progression in later life, on the other hand, are
lacking.  However, a prolonged cortisol secretion as a consequence of
repeated or chronic stress experience or to an impaired down-regulation of the HPA axis after stress exposure is thought to prevent the body
from recovering from stress appropriately which leads to suppression of
immune functions (Sapolsky, Romero, & Munck, 2000) as well as increased susceptibility to diseases (Cohen, Janicki-Deverts, & Miller,Promising and indirect evidence arises from longitudinal studies
that account for an increased disease risk among individuals exhibiting
stronger stress-induced increases of inﬂammatory proteins such as interleukin-6 and ﬁbrinogen (Brydon & Steptoe, 2005) as well as greater
(Charles, Piazza, Mogle,
aﬀective reactivity to daily stressors
Sliwinski, & Almeida,
Sliwinski,
Mogle, & Almeida, 2013) which both are linked to HPA axis activity. 
Charles,Piazza,
Abbreviations: ADS-L, Allgemeine Depressionsskala; BMI, body mass index; CES-D, Centers for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale; CFA, conﬁrmatory factor analysis; CLIA,
chemiluminescence immunoassay; CV, coeﬃcient of variation; HLM, hierarchical linear model; HPA, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis; KMO, Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure; KS,
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test; PCA, principal component analysis; PSS, Perceived Stress Scale; rmANOVA, repeated measures analysis of variance; RSQ, Response Style Questionnaire; SVF,
Stressverarbeitungsfragebogen; TSST, Trier Social Stress Test
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: johanna. janson@fau. de (J.  Janson). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 014
Received 9 February 2017; Received in revised form 17 July 2017; Accepted 18 July 2017
Available online 22 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
J.  Janson, N.  Rohleder
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 117–124
Cortisol secretion as an index of HPA axis activation, in turn, indicates
how stress activates biological stress-systems and acts as a major regulator of inﬂammation (Sapolsky, Romero, & Munck, 2000), which itself increases the risk of developing stress-related diseases.  In this
context, it is of special interest how stress-induced cortisol secretion
might be modulated by cognitive responses to stress (i. e.  coping). 
time and situations
Coping has originally been deﬁned as cognitive and behavioral efforts to deal with stress (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984).  Besides this initial
process-oriented approach, which perceives coping as dynamic process
depending on appraisals and reappraisals of stress situations, authors
frequently deﬁne the construct as coping styles or personality traits that
are stable across
(Krohne, 1993; Miller,
Combs, & Kruus, 1993).  Coping has been proposed as a determinant for
both mental and physical health (Folkman & Moskowitz, 2000, 2004),
and increasing interest in investigating the association between coping
and health outcomes has emerged.  The results from studies assessing
the relationship between coping styles and aﬀect in healthy participants, for example, reveal positive associations between problem/accommodation coping and positive aﬀect as well as between avoidance/
disengagement coping and negative aﬀect (e. g.  Ben-Zur, 1999, 2002). 
Furthermore, forms of avoidance and emotion-focused coping have
been shown to predict lower well-being (Mayordomo, Viguer, Sales,
Satorres, & Meléndez, 2016; Mayordomo-Rodríguez, Meléndez-Moral,
Viguer-Segui, & Sales-Galán, 2015; Zeidner, Matthews, & Shemesh,
2015) while task- and problem-oriented coping predict higher wellbeing (Goodarzi, Shokri, & Shariﬁ, 2015; Mayordomo-Rodríguez Name,A limited number of studies also reveal associations between
(avoidance) coping and indicators of physical health (for a review, see
Penley, Tomaka, & Wiebe, 2002).  Kohlmann, Weidner, and Messina
(1996), for example, showed that avoidance coping was associated with
greater systolic blood pressure reactivity during a laboratory speech
session.  In addition, the results from Vitaliano, Russo, Paulsen, and
Bailey (1995) indicate a relationship between avoidance coping and
slower cardiovascular recovery (diastolic blood pressure and heart rate)
to emotional and cognitive tasks among older adults.  As demonstrated
by Birditt, Nevitt, and Almeida (2015), avoidance coping further entails
delayed eﬀects with lower well-being and higher cortisol when having
an interpersonal tension the previous day.  Stowell, Kiecolt-Glaser, and
Glaser (2001) found a signiﬁcant interaction between perceived stress
and active/avoidance coping on proliferative immune responses.  Taken
together, studies show that indicators of both mental and physical
health are positively associated with forms of task- and problem-oriented coping while avoidance- and emotion-focused coping styles are
proposed as negative correlates of health-related parameters. 
Few studies have investigated coping styles in relationship with
HPA axis reactivity to natural and laboratory stressors.  As described
below and summarized by Biondi and Picardi (1999), it has been consistently demonstrated that HPA axis reactivity in response to both
types of stressors is modulated by coping style.  For instance, Bohnen,
Nicolson, Sulon, and Jolles (1991) examined the association between
coping styles and cortisol responses of healthy female participants
during a 4-h continuous mental stress task.  Cortisol response was found
to be negatively correlated with the emotion-focused coping style described as “comforting cognitions”.  Moreover, Nicolson (1992) explored the association between coping styles and HPA axis activity over
the course of three diﬀerent examination situations.  While no association between coping styles and cortisol reactivity was found, the results
reveal a stronger cortisol decline among participants with a high aﬃnity to “problem-oriented” coping style as well as a weaker decline
among participants scoring high on the dimensions “distraction” and
“comforting cognitions”.  In a more recent study, Höhne Name (2014)
examined the modulating eﬀect of coping styles on HPA axis activity in
response to two consecutive Trier Social Stress TestsKirschbaum, Pirke, & Hellhammer, 1993) which constitutes a standard
protocol for the experimental induction of psychosocial stress.  In acombined group consisting of both individuals with a remitted major
depression and healthy controls, the extent of negative coping (e. g. 
rumination, self-blame) positively predicted cortisol response both
during reactivity and recovery.  Other studies, in turn, did not ﬁnd relationships between coping styles and HPA axis stress responses
(Bossert Name, 1988; van Eck Name, 1996).  To sum up, active, direct,
and problem-focused coping strategies are correlated with reduced
psychoendocrine reactivity, while avoidant- and denial-oriented coping
strategies
reactivity
(Biondi & Picardi, 1999). 
associated with elevated HPA axisSince variation in HPA axis activity in acute stress-situations arises
from various situation-speciﬁc appraisals such as threat and challenge
(Gaab, Rohleder, Nater, & Ehlert, 2005), actual coping behavior may
vary according to subjective appraisals of own competence and control
expectancies and, in turn, deviate from habitual and established coping
styles.  As illustrated by Erdmann and Janke (2008) coping can be
considered as states, as well, whereby the way of coping strongly depends on speciﬁc characteristics of stress situations which has been
shown to result in instable factor-analytic integrations of coping responses.  Despite the importance of coping skills for healthy psychological and physiological functioning, no study to date has investigated
the role of situational coping eﬀorts when predicting endocrine stress
reactivity and recovery.  To better understand the role of coping as
determinant of stress responses and to evaluate the eﬃciency of actual
coping responses with regard to physiological functioning, individual
coping approaches during acute stress situations have to be taken into
account when exploring the etiology of disease.  Identifying potential
stress-buﬀering coping responses, in turn, might enable to systematically promote adequate coping behavior. 
In summary, studies reveal that variation in HPA axis activity in
response to psychosocial stress is modulated by coping style.  Since
coping styles do not shed light on the eﬃciency of coping eﬀorts, state
coping responses must be taken into consideration when exploring
stress-buﬀering coping responses.  Since the factor structure of state
coping dimensions is instable and varies across study settings and
samples (Erdmann & Janke, 2008), the ﬁrst aim of the present study
was to identify state coping dimensions that indicate representative
responses to acute psychosocial stress.  As increased stress reactions as
well as insuﬃcient recovery from acute stress have been proposed as
antecedents of stress-related disease such as cardiovascular disease, and
cancer (Cohen Name, 2007), it is of particular interest whether variation
in HPA axis activity can be explained by diﬀerent types of situational
coping behavior. 