Novel Microbial Diversity and Functional Potential in
the Marine Mammal Oral MicrobiomeHighlights
d Genomes were recovered from dolphin-associated
candidate phyla bacteria
d Two new bacterial phyla were deﬁned (C.  Delphibacteria and
C.  Fertabacteria)
d C.  Delphibacteria is common in the dolphin mouth and may
affect host physiology
d Novel functional diversity was identiﬁed, including unusual
CRISPR-Cas9 systemsNatasha K.  Dudek, Christine L.  Sun,
David Burstein, . . . , Brian C.  Thomas,
Jillian F.  Banﬁeld, David A.  Relman
Correspondence
relman@stanford. edu
In Brief
Dudek Name reconstruct genomes from
previously uncharacterized microbes
living in the dolphin mouth.  Three of these
genomes represent two new phyla, and
22 come from members of nine relatively
unexplored candidate phyla.  Novel
taxonomic diversity in the community is
accompanied by novel functional
diversity, such as unusual CRISPR-Cas9
systems. 
Dudek Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3752–3762
December 18, 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 040
Current BiologyNovel Microbial Diversity and Functional Potential
in the Marine Mammal Oral Microbiome
Natasha K.  Dudek,1 Christine L.  Sun,2,3 David Burstein,4 Rose S.  Kantor,5 Daniela S.  Aliaga Goltsman,2,3
Elisabeth M.  Bik,2,8 Brian C.  Thomas,4 Jillian F.  Banﬁeld,4,6 and David A.  Relman2,3,7,9,*
1Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
2Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
3Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
4Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
5Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
6Earth and Environmental Science, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
7Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA
8Present address: uBiome, San Francisco, CA 94105, USA
9Lead Contact
*Correspondence: relman@stanford. edu
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 040The vast majority of bacterial diversity lies within
phylum-level
lineages called ‘‘candidate phyla,’’
which lack isolated representatives and are poorly
understood.  These bacteria are surprisingly abundant in the oral cavity of marine mammals.  We employed a genome-resolved metagenomic approach
to recover and characterize genomes and functional
potential from microbes in the oral gingival sulcus of
two bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus).  We detected organisms from 24 known bacterial phyla and
one archaeal phylum.  We also recovered genomes
from two deep-branching, previously uncharacterized phylum-level lineages (here named ‘‘Candidatus
Delphibacteria’’ and ‘‘Candidatus Fertabacteria’’). 
The Delphibacteria lineage is found in both managed
and wild dolphins; its metabolic proﬁle suggests
a capacity for denitriﬁcation and a possible role in
dolphin health.  We uncovered a rich diversity of predicted Cas9 proteins, including the two longest predicted Cas9 proteins to date.  Notably, we identiﬁed
the ﬁrst type II CRISPR-Cas systems encoded by
members of the Candidate Phyla Radiation.  Using
their spacer sequences, we subsequently identiﬁed
and assembled a complete Saccharibacteria phage
genome.  These ﬁndings underscore the immense
microbial diversity and functional potential that await
discovery in previously unexplored environments. 
INTRODUCTION
The vast majority of bacterial diversity is found within phylumlevel
lineages that lack isolated representatives [1], commonly
referred to as ‘‘candidate phyla. ’’ Candidate phyla constitute at
least 103 out of approximately 142 widely recognized bacterial
phyla for which there is genomic representation [1–3]; 46% of
known bacterial phyla are clustered in the Candidate Phyla Radiation (CPR).  However, there remain many phylum-level bacterial
lineages that have no genomic representation and are not yet
formally recognized [4].  Genome-resolved metagenomic studies
offer unique and unprecedented insights into the biology of these
uncultured, poorly understood lineages and their biochemical
diversity [3–8].  In addition to revealing the environmentally and
economically important roles played by such bacteria, these
studies contribute greatly to our understanding of the distribution
of lifestyles across the tree of life.  For example, genomes from
members of the CPR suggest that they are metabolically sparse
and lack many biosynthetic pathways typically required for life,
presumably because these organisms are dependent on other
microbes for survival
[6, 9].  Candidate phyla genomes may
also reveal novel functional diversity, as phylogenetic diversity
is correlated with novel proteomic diversity and biological properties [10, 11]. 
Marine mammals are an ecologically important group of
animals harboring little-explored microbial communities.  Previous research has shown that bottlenose dolphins, in particular,
host a rich diversity of novel bacteria [12].  Nearly 70% of nearfull-length 16S rRNA genes from the dolphin microbiota were
novel in 2015 at the species level, and representatives from 25
bacterial phyla were present in the mouth alone.  Furthermore,
a surprising number of candidate phyla such as Gracilibacteria
(BD1-5/GN02), Modulibacteria (KSB3), and the Parcubacteria
(OD1) supergroup, which are unusual in mammal-associated environments, were found in the dolphin mouth [12].  Genomes from
such candidate phyla have nearly exclusively been retrieved
from non-host-associated environments, and thus it is unknown
how these bacteria adapt to a mammalian environment.  Interestingly, despite evidence that the marine mammal microbiota is
shaped by the sea, these bacteria were not detected in the adjacent seawater [12]. 
The vast majority of bacterial diversity is found within phylumlevel lineages that lack isolated representatives [1], commonly
referred to as ‘‘candidate phyla. ’’ Candidate phyla constitute at
least 103 out of approximately 142 widely recognized bacterial
On the basis of these prior observations, we concluded that
marine mammals afford an unusual opportunity for studying
bacterial diversity.  Working under the hypothesis that novel
phylogenetic diversity correlates with novel functional diversity,
3752 Current Biology 27, 3752–3762, December 18, 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
in this study we applied genome-resolved metagenomics to
investigate the diversity and functional potential of the dolphin
oral microbiome.  The results hint at the wealth of evolutionary
and biochemical diversity that remains uncharted within previously unexplored environments, including mammalian microbiomes, and will contribute to future comparative studies of
host-associated versus non-host-associated candidate phyla
bacteria. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Dolphin Oral Microbiota Composition and Structure
Swab samples were collected from the gingival sulcus of
healthy bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) under the purview of the U. S.  Navy’s Marine Mammal Program in San Diego
Bay, California.  Samples from two dolphins were selected for
shotgun sequencing based on the ﬁndings of Bik Name [12],
which indicated that
these two samples (DolJOral78 and
DolZOral124) contained representatives from nine candidate
phyla at relative abundances of R0. 05% (Table S1).  Pairedend Illumina HiSeq reads were generated, ﬁltered, assembled,
and used to recover microbial genomes, as described in STAR
Methods. 
From >63 Gbp of ﬁltered paired-end sequences, we recovered
107 draft-quality genomes from 24 previously described
bacterial phyla and one circular genome from a candidate Saccharibacteria (TM7) phage (presented below).  These genomes
derived from 22 organisms afﬁliated with the candidate phyla
Absconditabacteria (SR1), Campbellbacteria (OD1), Cloacimonetes (WWE1), Delongbacteria, Fermentibacteria (Hyd24-12),
Gracilibacteria (BD1-5/GN02), Modulibacteria (KSB3), and Moranbacteria (OD1), and the Saccharibacteria (TM7) phylum. 
Phylum-level assignments (or lack thereof, as was the case for
three of our genomes) were determined by constructing a phylogeny based on an alignment of 15 concatenated ribosomal
proteins (Figure 1; Data S1; see STAR Methods).  Of note, we
were able to link a 16S rRNA gene sequence to a member of
the Delongbacteria phylum, which previously consisted of a single genome for which no 16S rRNA gene had been recovered [2]. 
Additionally, low-coverage (%33) archaeal genome fragments
were recovered from two members of the Woesearcheota
phylum.  Similar sequences have been recovered from hostassociated environments (see SILVA database [13–15]), such
as coral heads [16] and human skin [17], but were not originally
recognized as afﬁliated with the Woesearcheota phylum or
placed within a comprehensive phylogeny. 
Bacterial community composition and structure inferred
from the same DNA preparations differed depending on the
survey method: genome-resolved metagenomics (this study)
versus 16S rRNA gene ampliﬁcation [12] (Figure 2; Figure S1;
Table S1).  Notably, the 16S rRNA gene that was associated
with the highest-coverage genome in both samples (17% and
4% relative abundance in DolJOral78 and DolZOral124, respectively; Figure 2) was barely detected in the amplicon-based survey (not detected in DolJOral78; 0. 04% relative abundance in
DolZOral124).  This is surprising, because the PCR primers
match the assembled sequence perfectly, the GC content of
the gene is 58%, and it contains no unusual
insertions.  The
two genomes are from the same species of Actinobacteria (order
Micrococcales), and the GC content of the genome is 68%. 
Furthermore, members of the CPR were greatly under-detected
using the amplicon-based approach.  From the metagenomic assemblies, we detected 16 unique CPR species-level genomes,
some of which ranked among the highest-coverage genomes
recovered (Figure 2).  For example, the fourth most abundant
bacterial organism in the DolJOral78 sample was a member of
the Saccharibacteria phylum (4% relative abundance), although
no Saccharibacteria representatives were detected in the
DolJOral78 sample in the previous 16S rRNA gene amplicon survey.  In the amplicon-based study [12], only nine unique operational taxonomic units (OTUs) from the CPR were identiﬁed
from both samples combined, with a maximum relative abundance of 0. 24%.  This discrepancy can be explained at least
partially by primer mismatches, consistent with previous reports
on the CPR [4].  Of the 21 unique CPR 16S rRNA genes assembled and identiﬁed in the metagenomic data, nine span the region between the commonly used 338F and 906R bacterial
primers (also used in Bik Name [12]) and have sufﬁcient read
coverage to validate the assembly.  Eight of these have 1–3 mismatches in at least one primer site.  In the amplicon study, eight
of the nine OTUs were detected among all samples, although
only the one OTU with no primer site mismatches was detected
in the two samples studied here. 
Given the breadth of novel bacterial diversity in the dolphin
oral samples, we next searched for novel phage diversity. 
Using a stringent set of criteria (see STAR Methods), we identiﬁed a set of 33 and 55 sequences from DolJOral78 and
DolZOral124, respectively, for which we had high conﬁdence
in their derivation from phage genomes.  These sequences
range in length from 1,583 to 119,885 bp (average 19,363
and 21,462; SD 13,243 and 19,615 bp).  To assess overlap
between samples, we performed a reciprocal best-hit BLAST
[18, 19] search between phage sequences from the two
samples.  We identiﬁed 14 phage genome fragments that
were present (or had close relatives present) in both samples. 
To evaluate the degree of phage genome novelty, we BLASTed
[18, 19] phage sequences against the NCBI non-redundant
nucleotide
(https://ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/nucleotide). 
Only three alignments were longer than 1,000 bp, the longest
of which was only 2,919 bp.  These alignments corresponded
to 2. 3%, 3. 8%, and 8. 2% of the lengths of the respective
phage scaffolds.  This suggests that phages in the dolphin
mouth are only distantly related to phages for which genomic
fragments have previously been recovered, as one would
expect under the hypothesis that novel bacterial diversity begets novel phage diversity. 
database
Novel, Deeply Divergent Phylum-Level Lineages
The concatenated ribosomal protein tree enabled determination
of the phylum-level identity of recovered genomes (Figure 1). 
Within this tree, three genomes belonging to two deep-branching lineages eluded identiﬁcation.  To evaluate whether these
two lineages were representative of previously undescribed
phyla, we examined whether (1) they formed monophyletic lineages in both the concatenated ribosomal protein phylogeny and
the 16S rRNA gene phylogeny, and (2) the 16S rRNA gene sequences of such lineages were at least 25% divergent from
those of known phyla (i. e. , the threshold used by Yarza Name [20]). 
Current Biology 27, 3752–3762, December 18, 2017 3753
Figure 1.  Phylogenetic Relationships among Genomes Recovered from the Dolphin Mouth
The maximum-likelihood tree includes representation from all genomes that contained R8 of 15 ribosomal proteins used to infer the phylogeny (with the
exception of one Delongbacteria genome with 7 ribosomal proteins) as well as from published genomes.  Bootstrap support values R50% are denoted with a
closed circle on the branches.  Branches of phyla with genomic representation in the dolphin mouth are color coded such that dark blue indicates candidate
phylum, light blue indicates other phylum, and red indicates novel, deep-branching lineage.  Labels for these phyla appear around the tree, with dotted lines
indicating the corresponding branch.  Numbers next to candidate phyla names indicate the number of genomes from each phylum that are publicly available in
NCBI databases prior to this study (purple), the number of those that come from an animal-associated environment (green), and the number that were recovered
in this study (orange).  Branches of the remaining phyla are included in the tree as references, are colored black, and can be identiﬁed using the legend at the
bottom of the ﬁgure.  The CPR is denoted with blue shadowing, and the FCB superphylum is denoted with green shadowing.  The topology of the tree with respect
to the position of the CPR does not recapitulate that of Hug Name [1], presumably due to lower sampling depth reducing the ability to resolve the branching order of
the deepest lineages.  See also Figures S1–S3, Table S1, and Data S1. 
3754 Current Biology 27, 3752–3762, December 18, 2017
Figure 2.  Community Structure of the Dolphin Oral Microbiota
The top panel presents the community structure of the DolJOral78 sample, and the bottom panel presents that of the DolZOral124 sample.  Each symbol represents a bin, which is a set of scaffolds that share similar genomic signatures.  In most cases, bins represent of a genome (or fragments of a genome) from a single
organism.  Bins that contain multiple genomes from organisms with similar genomic signatures are denoted by a purple outline around the symbol.  The average
coverage of all scaffolds in a bin is represented on the y axis, and bins are ranked in order of decreasing average coverage on the x axis.  Due to the complexity of
the samples, not all low-coverage genomes could be binned.  This point, after which only a portion of genomes could be binned, is denoted by an arrow for
DolJOral78 and is not reached in the top 75 bins for DolZOral124.  See also Figure S1 and Table S1. One lineage, for which we propose the name ‘‘Delphibacteria’’
(rationale in Supplemental Discussion),
is afﬁliated with the
Fibrobacteres-Chlorobi-Bacteroidetes (FCB) superphylum and
is represented by genomes DolJOral78_Bacteria_63_78 and
DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63.  The names refer, for example, to
sample DolZOral124,
taxonomic resolution Bacteria,
GC content of 64%, coverage of 633).  The 16S rRNA gene
sequence from the Delphibacteria lineage clusters with sequences from what is currently recognized as the Latescibacteria phylum in the SILVA database [13–15] (see Supplemental
Discussion, Figure S2, and Data S1).  The diversity encompassed
by this ‘‘phylum’’ was recently found to be an assemblage of at
least two phylum-level lineages: Latescibacteria and the newly
proposed Eisenbacteria [2].  Nearly all members of the Delphibacteria lineage share <75% sequence identity across the 16S
rRNA gene with members of the Eisenbacteria phylum (Figure S2A) and <78. 5% sequence identity with members of the
Latescibacteria phylum (Figure S2B).  Predicted proteins in the
near-complete genome from this lineage were most similar to
those from the Deltaproteobacteria phylum (Figure S3A). 
Notably, the Delphibacteria lineage was detected in 41 oral samples from 15 of 33 U. S.  Navy dolphins and one of ten wild dolphins surveyed with 16S rRNA gene amplicon pyrosequencing
in Bik Name [12], although it was classiﬁed as a member of the
Latescibacteria phylum.  In the DolJOral78 sample, two Delphibacteria genomes were detected at relative abundances of
1. 6% and 1. 2%, while in the DolZOral124 sample one Delphibacteria genome was detected at a relative abundance of 0. 7%. 
The second previously uncharacterized lineage, for which we
propose the name ‘‘Fertabacteria’’ (rationale in Supplemental
Discussion), is afﬁliated with the CPR and is represented by
the genome DolZOral124_Bacteria_38_8.  The 16S rRNA gene
sequence from Fertabacteria clusters with sequences from
what is currently recognized as the Peregrinibacteria (PER)
phylum in the SILVA database (see Supplemental Discussion
and Data S1).  It is part of a well-supported clade with <75%
sequence identity to the rest of the PER phylum, including
PER-ii (Figure S2C).  Predicted proteins from this lineage are
Current Biology 27, 3752–3762, December 18, 2017 3755
Figure 3.  Functional Proﬁle of Delphibacteria
Key predicted metabolic and functional features are depicted.  Genes of interest are denoted by abbreviations in the colored shapes.  Filled shapes represent
genes predicted to be present or likely to be present, whereas unﬁlled shapes represent genes that were not identiﬁed.  See also Figure S3 and Data S2. 
most similar to those from the Peregrinibacteria phylum (Figure S3B), yet the 16S rRNA gene sequence identity argues
against its inclusion in this group.  Out of all samples surveyed
with 16S rRNA gene pyrosequencing in Bik Name [12], only a single Fertabacteria amplicon was detected.  The amplicon was
generated from a sample of forcefully expired air (‘‘chuff’’) from
the dolphin respiratory tract collected on sterile ﬁlter paper,
and was originally classiﬁed as a member of the Gracilibacteria
phylum.  The 906R primer used in Bik Name [12] had two mismatches to the corresponding priming site, and therefore this
organism may have been widely under-detected in the amplicon-based survey.  The Fertabacteria genome is one of the
lowest-coverage genomes (83) in this study, with a relative
abundance of 0. 09% in the DolZOral124 sample. 
Functional Proﬁle of the Delphibacteria Lineage
Due to the abundance and prevalence of Delphibacteria organisms in the dolphin oral samples, we investigated the metabolic
potential of
the near-complete DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63
genome.  The genome dataset contained 49 of 51 universal bacterial single-copy genes used to assess completeness [21]. 
It comprised 3,362,850 bp and is predicted to contain 3,011 protein-coding genes.  It appears to utilize a variety of compounds as
carbon and energy sources, including polysaccharides such as
starch/glycogen, acetate, acetaldehyde, ethanol, and butyrate
(Figure 3; Data S2).  DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63 carries the
potential to ferment to acetate, with ethanol and acetaldehyde
3756 Current Biology 27, 3752–3762, December 18, 2017
being produced during regeneration of NAD+ required for glycolysis.  Two of the three genes speciﬁc to gluconeogenesis are also
present, as are those involved in the non-oxidative pentose
phosphate pathway.  The genome includes the capacity for
amylose synthesis and possibly GDP-L-rhamnose synthesis. 
The complete gene complement required for running the
forward tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle is present.  Accordingly,
the DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63 genome is predicted to
support aerobic respiration and possibly also anaerobic respiration using nitrogen compounds as terminal electron acceptors.  The catalytic subunit of a periplasmic nitrate reductase
was detected (napA), as were accessory periplasmic nitrate
reductase subunits.  The catalytic subunit of a nitric oxide
reductase (norB) and the terminal nitrous oxide reductase
(nosZ) were also detected.  Nitrite reductase genes (nirK
or nirS) were not identiﬁed, nor were many of the subunits
typically associated with the above reductases.  Nonetheless,
the presence of catalytic subunits for three out of the four
steps involved in converting nitrate to dinitrogen suggests
that this Delphibacteria representative is capable of denitriﬁcation.  We detected another mechanism for generating proton
motive force in the form of a pumping pyrophosphatase,
indicating that DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63 may be able
to utilize pyrophosphate as an alternative chemical energy
carrier to ATP. 
DolZOral124_Bacteria_64_63 is most likely a lipopolysaccharide-producing bacterial species with ﬂagella and type IV pili andB
Figure 4. 