
Attention constitutes a constellation of cognitive processes responsible for directing awareness to relevant stimuli and ﬁltering out
irrelevant information.  Attentional impairments are known to constitute performance reductions in other cognitive domains including
memory and executive functions in patients suﬀering from Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) [1,2].  The basal forebrain (BF) cholinergic system, consisting of cortically-projecting neurons in the nucleus basalis magnocellularis (nBM) and substantia innominata (SI) region, mediates essential aspects of attentional
information processing [3,4], and
cholinergic dysregulation is a common feature of the mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) and AD pathology [5–8].  Thus, it is suggested that
disruption in cholinergic signaling may underlie cognitive decline in
MCI/AD.  Aging is a well-known risk factor for AD.  Although a gradual
weakening of the cholinergic system and subtle decrements in attentional capacities have been reported in aging [9–13], the mechanisms
responsible for the accelerated decline in cholinergic function in
sporadic AD are not fully understood. 
BF cholinergic neurons depend upon nerve growth factor (NGF) for
survival, growth, and maturation [14–16].  Substantial evidence indicates that the cholinotrophic eﬀects of NGF are mediated by its
binding to the high-aﬃnity tropomyosin kinase A (trkA) receptors
[17–19].  Moreover, the loss of trkA receptors has been observed in the
postmortem brains of AD subjects [20–22].  Together, these studies
support the notion that perhaps deﬁcient trkA signaling in cholinergic
neurons may underlie their exceptional vulnerability and lead to cognitive decline in AD [23,24].  However, neurotrophic modulation of the
cholinergic system and cognitive capacities has not been thoroughly
investigated in the context of aging, which is known to potentially increase the risk of developing AD [25]. 
We previously found signiﬁcant attentional impairments and disrupted cholinergic signaling in aged but not adult trkA-suppressed rats
[26].  In another follow-up study, we observed that cholinergic-attentional capacities were partially rescued by blocking proNGF, a precursor of NGF, in trkA-suppressed aged rats [27].  ProNGF is known to
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: vinay. parikh@temple. edu (V.  Parikh). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 017
Received 13 June 2017; Received in revised form 20 July 2017; Accepted 7 August 2017
Available online 10 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
B.  Yegla, V.  Parikh
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 111–121
induce apoptotic signaling via its interaction with high-aﬃnity p75
receptors and the sortilin complex [28], and numerous studies indicated that the expression of this pro-neurotrophin is elevated in aging
and AD [29–32].  Thus, age-related imbalance between proNGF/NGF
and trkA/p75 signaling may account for increased vulnerability of the
cholinergic system and associated cognitive impairments in AD. 
Moreover, suppression of trkA signaling per se in young may not impose
any inimical eﬀects on the BF cholinergic system.  This view is supported by a previous study showing that forebrain-speciﬁc targeted
deletion of NGF or trkA receptors exerted detrimental eﬀects on BF
cholinergic neurons during postnatal development but did not impact
learning and memory performance when assessed in either young adult
or intermediate-aged mice [33]. 
During the progression of sporadic AD, cortical areas are aﬀected in
a stereotypic sequence that recapitulates ontogenetic brain development [34].  Although the available evidence supports the idea that
perhaps reduced trophic support during ontogenetic development and
maturation of the cortical cholinergic input system may escalate into
MCI and AD [35,36], the premise that developmental abrogation of BF
trkA signaling would accelerate age-related decline in the cholinergic
system and cognitive capacities has never been tested.  Here we conducted a longitudinal study to evaluate the life-long impact of developmental trkA suppression on attentional functions.  We utilized an
adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector that expresses trkA-shRNA to selectively knockdown trkA receptors in the BF during the postnatal
phase in rats when cholinergic projections make contact with cortical
target regions.  The animals were trained in an operant sustained attention task (SAT), and performance was assessed throughout adulthood until old age, at which point cholinergic signaling and morphology were also evaluated.  Developmental trkA suppression neither
accelerated the emergence, nor exacerbated the presence, of age-related
attentional impairments.  Moreover, postnatal trkA disruption aﬀected
only certain aspects of cholinergic transmission in aged rats.  Together,
our ﬁndings indicate that lifelong cognitive engagement may have
compensated for the detrimental eﬀects of developmental trkA knockdown on age-related decline in attention processes and the cholinergic
transmission that these cognitive capacities depend on. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Subjects
Male Wistar rat pups [post-natal day (PND) 14] were purchased
from Charles River Laboratories (Malvern, PA, USA) along with the
nursing dams (8 pups/dam).  Animals were maintained in a temperature- and humidity-controlled room with a 12:12 light-dark cycle
starting at 7AM at Temple University.  At PND 18–21, rat pups underwent stereotaxic intracranial infusions of AAV vectors (see procedure
below).  Pups were returned to cages and maintained with the dams
until weaning at PND 22 following which the animals were grouphoused (2 per cage) with food and water ad libitum until the commencement of further experiments.  All experimental procedures were
conducted in accordance with the National Institute of Health guidelines and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee and the Institutional Biosafety Committee at Temple
University. 
2. 2.  Stereotaxic surgeries and experimental design
Rat pups (PND 18–21) were prepared for stereotaxic surgeries to
produce knockdown of BF trkA receptors using an AAV vector-based
RNA interference (RNAi) approach.  This developmental period was
selected because BF cholinergic neurons make contact with NGF-producing target neurons throughout the cortical mantle during postnatal
weeks 3–5, and trkA signaling is critical in facilitating proper cortical
cholinergic innervation [37,18,38,39].  All surgeries were performed
under aseptic conditions.  Pups were anesthetized with isoﬂurane (4–5%
for induction and 1–2% maintenance dose) using an anesthesia machine (Surgivet, Dublin, OH, USA) and mounted on a stereotaxic frame
(Model 962; David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA, USA).  The head of
the pups was positioned into the head frame using neonatal rat ear bars
containing Zygoma ear cups (David Kopf).  An isothermal deltaphase
pad (Braintree Scientiﬁc, Braintree, MA, USA) was used to consistently
maintain animals’ body temperature at 37 °C throughout the surgical
procedure. 