
Probabilistic categorization learning requires a coordinated interaction between declarative and non-declarative memory.  Over the past
20 years, evidence has accumulated that probabilistic learning involves
distinct anatomically and functionally segregated memory systems [1]. 
It has been discussed whether these systems interact in a competitive
[2,3] or cooperative manner [4].  Brain regions which are involved in
cognitive control, performance integration and reward learning [5–9]
represent additional factors aﬀecting the probabilistic categorization
learning process.  With respect to memory, the interplay of the medial
temporal lobe [MTL] and the basal ganglia is in the focus of research
[2].  Declarative memory involves the hippocampus which supports the
acquisition of ﬂexible knowledge in contrast to more rigid striatumdependent memory systems [10,11]. 
The weather prediction task (WPT) is a well-known probabilistic
learning task [5–7,2].  In this task, participants are asked to classify one
to three (out of four) diﬀerent cue cards into one of two weather categories (rain or sun) based on feedback they receive for their actions. 
The WPT is a well-established probabilistic categorization learning task
that demonstrates the diﬀerential contributions of declarative (mediated by the hippocampus) and nondeclarative (mediated by the basal
ganglia) memory processes [12].  Patients with basal ganglia disorders
show reduced performances in the WPT, especially in the early probabilistic learning phase [5].  However, amnesic patients with damage to
the hippocampus perform comparably to controls in the early phases of
learning, presumably because the declarative memory system interferes
with the nondeclarative regularities detected by the nondeclarative
memory system [6]. 
Additionally, further studies focused on the contribution of declarative knowledge to WPT performance [8,13,9,14].  Schwabe and
Wolf [9], for instance, demonstrated a positive correlation between
WPT task performance and hippocampal activation.  It seems that the
hippocampus-based learning and the hippocampal activity play an
important role in the categorization learning process and support the
learning performance in a probabilistic learning task. 
The hippocampal activity as well as the hippocampal based memory
processing and hippocampal based behavior can be in turn modiﬁed by
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: Sabrina. Schenk@rub. de (S.  Schenk). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 027
Received 3 March 2017; Received in revised form 30 May 2017; Accepted 17 August 2017
Available online 24 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
S.  Schenk Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 208–214
Fig.  1.  Modiﬁed version of the weather prediction task. 
the environmental enrichment [15–17].  This eﬀect might be mediated
by enhanced visual exploration of enriched environments, which in
turn promotes hippocampal neuroplasticity and hippocampus-dependent learning and declarative memory.  Based on these ﬁndings a
modiﬁcation of the environmental enrichment or a visual exploration
training should enhance hippocampal-based learning and behavior as
well as the related hippocampal activity.  Since the hippocampus responds to both the real and the virtual environment in a comparable
way [18,19], it should be possible to use video games as an eﬀective
training method to enhance hippocampal-based learning and behavior
as well as the related hippocampal activity. 
In previous research, playing video games has already been linked
to improved attention resources, visual imagery, problem solving, visual processing, response speed [20–22] and cognitive ﬂexibility [23]. 
Moreover and in accordance with the positive eﬀect of the environmental enrichment, Clemenson and Stark [17] demonstrated that video
games provide a strong environmental enrichment, which leads to enhanced memory performance on a task that is thought to tax hippocampal processing.  All these cognitive functions, which can be improved by video games, are important factors within the probabilistic
categorization learning process. 
Using the WPT, the current study investigated the eﬀects of video
game playing on the performance in a probabilistic categorization task,
the related usage of learning and memory processes as well as other
cognitive functions and its neural correlates, which represents a widely
unexplored area in gaming research up to now.  We used a modiﬁed
version of the WPT (see [9]) that include an equal condition (50/50%
probabilities) as well as more certain (probabilities in the 80/20%
range) and less certain conditions (probabilities in the 70/30% and 60/
40% range).  In contrast to the uncertain conditions, which should address the nondeclarative learning and activate the implicit memory
system (mediated by the basal ganglia), the certain condition should be
related to a more pronounced usage of declarative knowledge and
should additionally activate the explicit memory system (mediated by
the MTL, especially the hippocampus). 
Based on previous ﬁndings, we expected that video gamers show
better categorization performances due to a more pronounced usage of
declarative knowledge, hippocampus-dependent learning and memory
processes.  More speciﬁcally, we aimed to investigate to which degree
probabilistic categorization learning is positively mediated by the assumed enhanced hippocampus-depending learning of video gamers that
is due to the strong environmental enrichment of video games.  To
measure these eﬀects of video game playing the categorization performance in the WPT, the brain activity and the explicit knowledge of
the task and their relation to each other were assessed. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Participants
The current study included ﬁfteen healthy right-handed video gamers (13 male and 4 female; mean age: 24. 6 years; SD: 3. 0 years) and
ﬁfteen healthy right-handed non-gamers (13 male and 4 female; mean
age: 27. 5 years; SD: 4. 1 years).  The subjects were recruited through
advertisements at the Ruhr University and in local newspapers.  The
group membership was deﬁned on the basis of a screening questionnaire.  Video gamers were characterized by playing more than 15 h
of video games like “starcraft” or other action-based videogames per
week.  Non-gamers, with low or without any video game experience,
were deﬁned by playing less than 4 h per week. 
All participants had normal or corrected to normal vision and no
current or past mental illnesses.  The study was performed in accordance
with ethical standards laid down in the declaration of Helsinki and
written informed consent was obtained from all subjects.  The investigation was approved by the local Ethics Committee ofPsychological Faculty of the Ruhr University Bochum, Germany. 
2. 2.  Stimuli and task
Subjects were scanned while performing a modiﬁed version of the
WPT ([5,6,2]; see Fig.  1).  The experiment was performed using Presentation® software (Neurobehavioral Systems, Inc. , Albany, CA, USA)
and MRI-suitable LCD video goggles (Resonance Technology Company,
Inc. , Northridge, CA, USA) with a resolution of 800 × 600 pixels, registering the responses with an MRI-suitable keypad. 
Before the WPT started, participants were instructed that on each
trial one to three (out of four) diﬀerent cue cards will appear and that
they should learn to predict the weather based on the presented cards. 
Participants classiﬁed card stimulus sets as predictions of the weather
(sun/rain) and got feedback (positive/negative) accordingly to their
choice.  Each card pattern was associated with ﬁxed probabilities for
more/less probable weather outcomes (probabilities of 50/50%; 60/
40%; 70/30%; 80/20%).  The diﬀerent card combinations and positions
were randomly presented and associated with the two possible weather
outcomes.  The experiment consisted of two sessions of 100 trials each,
resulting in 200 trials over the course of the experiment (see [9]).  After
completion of the WPT, the participants answered a self-designed postexperimental questionnaire to assess cue usage and declarative
knowledge about the WPT.  The questionnaire was completed outside
the scanner and contained 14 items that assessed explicit task knowledge about the WPT.  For example, participants were asked which card
or card combinations were most strongly associated with the two
weather possibilities.  For 12 items, one point was given for each correct
answer.  For the remaining two items that contained two sub-questions
up to two points were given.  The score reached in the post-experimentalS.  Schenk Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 208–214
Fig.  2.  Choices of the more probable weather outcomes (in %) over all
conditions and separated for each condition.  One asterisk representing a
signiﬁcance threshold of p ≤ . 05, two asterisks representing p ≤ . 01,
three asterisks representing p ≤ . 005 and four asterisks representing
p ≤ . 001.  Error bars represent the standard error of the mean [SE]. 
questionnaire was used as a measure of declarative knowledge.  Subjects
could reach up to 16 points in the explicit knowledge questionnaire. 
2. 3.  Image acquisition
The experiment was performed using a Philips 3T Achieva MRI
scanner with a 32 channel SENSE head coil.  In order to create a mean
structural image and to overlay activations, a T1 weighted structural
image was acquired for each participant at the beginning of the experimental
size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm,
TE = 3. 8 ms, ﬂip angle = 8°).  T2* weighted EPIs were acquired in an
ascending sequence of 32 slices (voxel size = 1. 79 × 1. 79 × 3 mm,
TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms).  The ﬁrst ﬁve dummy images obtained at
the beginning of each scanning session were discarded to allow for MRI
signal stabilization. voxelslices,
2. 4.  Data analyses
All data analyses described below included the covariate “gender”
in order to take into account of possible gender eﬀects. 
For the analysis of the behavioral data, Greenhouse Geisser and
Bonferroni corrected repeated measures ANCOVAs with the covariate
“gender” and the factors “group” (video gamers vs.  non-gamers) and
“condition” (probabilities of 60/40%; 70/30%; 80/20%) were applied
for the percentage of the more probable weather outcomes within and
between groups.  Additionally, two-tailed t-tests were used to resolve
signiﬁcant interactions.  Furthermore, separate ANCOVAs with the
covariate “gender” and the factor “condition” (probabilities of 60/40%;
70/30%; 80/20%) were calculated for both groups.  Two-tailed t-tests
were applied to resolve signiﬁcant interactions.  An independent samples t-test was conducted for a group comparison regarding the declarative knowledge about the WPT, as represented by the total score
reached in the post-experimental questionnaire. 
The functional and structural images were preprocessed using the
latest release of SPM 8 (http://www. ﬁl. ion. ucl. ac. uk/spm/software/
spm8).  Preprocessing included slice time correction to the middle slice
of each volume, realignment and unwarping as well as co-registration
of the T1-weighted image to the mean T2*-weighted image.  Structural
images were segmented into gray matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal ﬂuid.  The gray matter images were normalized to a standard
anatomical
template image (Montreal Neurologic Institute, MNI). 
Normalized gray matter images were used for normalization of the
structural and functional images. 