
The visual system has limited processing capacity, so simultaneous
stimuli present in the visual ﬁeld mutually suppress their evoked activity in the visual cortex.  Competition between stimuli can be resolved
by top-down mechanisms, such as selective attention, or by bottom-up
stimulus-driven mechanisms, such as saliency.  Selective attention to the
behavioral relevant stimuli is considered a top-down process, in which
high-level processing areas in the prefrontal and posterior parietal
cortices, exert a biasing signal towards the visual regions processing the
relevant items (Miller & D’Esposito, 2005).  As a consequence, sensory
regions show increased activity for the relevant vs the irrelevant items
(Armstrong, Fitzgerald, & Moore, 2006; Buﬀalo, Fries, Landman,
Liang, & Desimone, 2010), making stimulus processing more accurate
(Richter, Thompson, Bosman, & Fries, 2017).  Neural synchrony seems
to be a key mechanism to enhance neural representation of the attended
sensory input.  Several models postulate that gamma and alpha band
oscillations play a pivotal role in top-down processes such as selective
attention, with antagonist roles (Fries, Reynolds, Rorie, & Desimone,2008;
Oostenveld, & Desimone,Womelsdorf,
inhibition of
Jensen & Mazaheri, 2010; Klimesch Name, 2007; Womelsdorf, Fries,
Mitra, & Desimone, 2006).  Whereas gamma synchronization represents
a high excitability state of the underlying neural population (Fries Name,
2001), and is thus associated with processing of information; alpha
synchronization represents a state of low excitability and has been associated with the functional
task-irrelevant regions
(Jensen & Mazaheri, 2010).  In this line, alpha modulation in visual
areas represents an anticipatory visuospatial attention correlate.  Some
experiments have found an alpha power increase (or alpha synchronization) ipsilateral to the attended hemiﬁeld related to the suppression
of unattended neural representations (Kelly, Lalor, Reilly, & Foxe, 2006;
Rihs, Michel, & Thut, 2007;Worden, Foxe, Wang, & Simpson, 2000),
whereas others have found an alpha power decrease (or desynchronization) contralateral
to the attended hemiﬁeld (Kelly, GomezRamirez, & Foxe, 2009; Sauseng Name, 2005; Yamagishi, Goda, Callan,
Anderson, & Kawato, 2005) linked to enhancement of neural excitability in cortical areas processing the attended stimulus. 
Like visuospatial attention, working memory (WM) has capacity
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: pablo. campo@uam. es (P.  Campo). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 015
Received 8 March 2017; Received in revised form 17 July 2017; Accepted 18 July 2017
Available online 23 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
C.  Poch Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 63–70
restrictions, in which only limited amount of information can be represented during a short interval.  Top-down mechanisms have been
shown to operate during the maintenance interval to optimize WM
performance (Griﬃn & Nobre, 2003; Lepsien & Nobre, 2007).  Additionally, recent theoretical conceptualizations highlight the ﬂexible
nature of memory representations, which are maintained in diﬀerent
accessibility states and the allocation of attention can move them into a
high prioritized state (Lewis-Peacock & Postle, 2012; LaRocque, LewisPeacock, Drysdale, Oberauer, & Postle, 2013; Zokaei, Manohar,
Husain, & Feredoes, 2013, Zokaei, Ning, Manohar, Feredoes, & Husain,
2014; Heuer & Schubö, 2016a).  An eﬃcient experimental strategy to
study the beneﬁt of orienting attention to representations already held
in WM is presenting a spatial cue during the retention period indicating
which item is likely to be probed.  This is widely known as the retro-cue
paradigm, because the cue is provided after the memory set is encoded. 
The use of this paradigm has demonstrated that orienting attention to
perceptual representation, this is, before encoding, and orienting attention to memory representation, this is, after encoding, exhibit a similar behavioral beneﬁt (Griﬃn & Nobre, 2003; Myers, Walther, Wallis,
Stokes, & Nobre, 2015).  In addition, both processes elicit a similar
modulation of evoked visual activity (Griﬃn & Nobre, 2003).  These
results suggest that a common set of attentional control (i. e.  top-down)
mechanisms can be used in both cognitive contexts, this is, when selecting items in the outside world, and when selecting items among
internal representations (i. e. , WM).  While there is abundant research
about the patterns of neural oscillatory activity underlying attentional
processes in the perceptual domain, the modulation of oscillatory activity by the retro-cue has been much less studied. 
Similarly to orienting attention to the perceptual space, retro-cue
experiments also ﬁnd an alpha modulation related to orienting attention to memory representations (Nobre, Gitelman, Dias, & Mesulam,
2000; Kastner & Ungerleider, 2001; Poch, Campo, & Barnes, 2014;
Wallis, Stokes, Cousijn, Woolrich, & Nobre, 2015; Mok, Myers,
Wallis, & Nobre, 2016; Schneider, Mertes, & Wascher, 2016).  However,
contrary to the much studied phenomenon in perception, the characteristics of alpha modulations in WM are still under examination. 
Visuospatial attention experiments have proven useful to disentangle the neural generators of alpha modulation in order to determine
its functionality.  A recent MEG study found two dissociated generators
of alpha activity related to diﬀerent attentional mechanisms (Capilla,
Schoﬀelen, Paterson, Thut, & Gross, 2014).  While alpha ipsilateral increases arised from the dorsal stream to support attentional shifts,
contralateral alpha suppression in the ventral occipital cortex was related to feature processing.  This dissociation would be of great relevance in WM as it could provide further understanding of sensory
recruitment proposals which posit that maintenance of information is
accomplished by sensory cortices (Postle, 2006; Serences, Ester,
Vogel, & Awh, 2009). 
Whether item prioritization needs sustained attention to encoded
information or not is matter of debate.  Some authors have argued that
retro-cue guides attention to the relevant item, and that it stays under
focal attention until probe presentation (Makovsik & Jiang, 2007;
Matsukura, Luck, & Vecera, 2007; Makovski, Sussman, & Jiang, 2008;
Pertzov, Bays, Joseph, & Husain, 2013).  However, other authors have
found that sustained attention is not needed for the beneﬁt of the retro
cue (Hollingworth & Maxcey-Richard, 2013; Rerko, Souza, & Oberauer,
2014).  Convergently, electrophysiological experiments have found a
transient alpha lateralization related to attentional orienting (Mok
Name, 2016; Myers Name, 2015; Wallis Name, 2015).  In this line, it has
been proposed that transient alpha desynchronization is an index of
access to memory representation and, once a representation is accessed,
a change in the representational state takes place and alpha modulation
is no longer needed (Wolﬀ, Jochim, Akyürek, & Stokes, 2017). 
Behavioural studies have found divergent results about the extent of
the retro-cue beneﬁt.  Some authors reported that retrocue beneﬁts are
observed only for one single item (Makovsik & Jiang, 2007), whileothers have found that is possible to retrospectively orient attention to
more than one (Heuer & Schubö, 2016b).  Electrophysiological retro-cue
studies have mainly explored the eﬀects of retro-cueing one item
(Griﬃn & Nobre, 2003; Myers, Stokes, & Nobre, 2017; Schneider Name,
2016).  To our knowledge, the only electrophysiological work manipulating retro-cued load found that alpha power was modulated by relevant cued information (Manza, Hau, & Leung, 2014).  However, this
study used bilateral arrays, so it did not address alpha lateralization
diﬀerences related to selecting varying amounts of items. 
In the present study we use a retro-cue paradigm with three conditions, one-cue, two-cue, and neutral-cue.  We explore the dynamics of
alpha band activity related to the retro-cue and use source localization
to address the issues previously exposed.  We hypothesized that according to a current theory of item prioritization (Myers Name, 2017),
alpha desynchronization would transiently emerge from areas coding
sensory information.  Furthermore, accordingly to this model, the twocue condition would be expected to produce a more pronounced alpha
lateralization respect to one-cue with greater disinhibition of the contralateral sensory cortex. 
<Middle> Methods. 
1. 1.  Participants
Seventeen adult subjects [mean age, 25. 36 years; standard deviation
(SD), 3. 13 years; range, 22–32 years; nine females], without any history
of neurological or psychiatric illness, volunteered for participation in
the study, which was approved by the local ethical committee of the
Center of Biomedical Technology (Madrid, Spain), and gave written
consent, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, after the nature
of the procedures involved had been explained to them.  Participants
were right-handed according to the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory
(Oldﬁeld 1971). 
1. 2.  Stimuli and tasksGiﬀrinNobre
(Griﬃn & Nobre,
The experimental task was adapted from a retro-cueing paradigmdeveloped
Lepsien & Nobre, 2006) and is illustrated in Fig.  1.  At the start of each
trial, participants ﬁrst saw a white central ﬁxation cross lasting
1000 ms.  This was followed by a sample memory set, consisting of four
gray rectangles with diﬀerent orientations (0°, 45o, 90 o,13o) displayed
in four locations on a black background.  Each rectangle size was of
7. 62° of visual angle and their center was located at 7. 62° eccentricity
for the horizontal and vertical planes.  The to-be remembered array
remained on the screen for 200 ms, in order to discourage participants
from making saccadic eye movements to scan the individual items. 
After a 1000 ms delay interval, participants could be presented with
either an informative spatial cue (i. e.  retro-cue) or with a non-informative cue (i. e.  neutral cue).  The retro-cue consisted of one or two
arrows originating from the ﬁxation cross pointing to one or two of the
four locations that had been occupied by a rectangle in the memory
array, thus indicating the item or items that will be subsequently
probed (validity 100%)
(Lepsien, Griﬃn, Devlin, & Nobre, 2005;
Matsukura Name, 2007).  The neutral cue consisted of four arrows originating from the ﬁxation cross pointing to each of the four locations,
thus providing no information regarding the relevant item.  Cues were
presented for 200 ms, and were followed by another 1000-ms delay
interval.  Finally, participants were presented with a single rectangle in
one location for 1500 ms, during which they were required to respond. 
The task was to indicate, by button press, whether the probe had the
same orientation as the memory item.  Following this response period, a
blank screen was shown for 1800 ms before the onset of the next trial
(Fig.  1).  A total of 360 trials were presented, of which 120 had retrocues indicating one location, 120 had retro-cues indicating two locations, and 120 had neutral cues.  Cues pointing to one or two locations
C.  Poch Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 63–70
Fig.  1.  Depiction of the ﬂow and timing of events for
each condition of the MEG experiment.  At the beginning of a trial, participants saw a white central
ﬁxation cross for 1000 ms.  A set of items was then
brieﬂy displayed (200 ms) for study, consisting of
four grey rectangles with diﬀerent orientations displayed in four locations on a black background. 
1000 ms after the oﬀset of the memory array, participants could be presented with either an informative spatial cue (i. e.  retro-cue) or with no
cueing information (i. e.  neutral cue).  A retro-cue
consisted of one or two arrows originating from the
ﬁxation cross pointing to one (one-cue) or two (twocue) of the four locations that had been occupied by
a rectangle in the memory array, thus indicating
where a relevant item or items were present (validity
100%).  The neutral cue consisted of four arrows
originating from the ﬁxation cross pointing to each
of the four locations, thus providing no information
regarding the relevant item.  Cues were presented for
200 ms and were followed by another 1000 ms of
delay interval.  Finally, participants were presented
with a single rectangle in one location for 1500 ms
during which they were required to respond. 
were used in order to determine whether attention can be reoriented
within WM to more than one item, such as in the perceptual space
(Awh & Pashler, 2000; Makovski & Jiang, 2007; Matsukura & Vecera,
2015).  The experiment lasted for ∼40 min, and was performed in one
single session during MEG scanning. 
500 ms before memory array presentation to 1000 ms after the presentation of the probe, for each trial, for each condition, for each participant.  Trials were visually inspected, and rejected when they contained sensor or muscular artefacts, and/or eye blinks. 
1. 3.  Behavioral analysis
1. 5.  Time–frequency analysis
Analysis of performance was assessed in accuracy and reaction
times (RTs).  Accuracy was calculated as the hit minus false alarm rate. 
Only RTs of correct responses were included in the analysis.  In order to
investigate the beneﬁt of directing attention to memory representations, an ANOVA was conducted for detection rate and another for RTs
with three levels: one-element, two-element, neutral. 
Diﬀerential eﬀects of cue side were investigated on detection rates
and RTs by a 2 × 2 ANOVA with factors Cue Side (left vs right) and
Load (one-cue vs two-cue elements). 
1. 4.  Data acquisition
MEG data were obtained with a whole-head 306-channel
Vectorview system (Elekta-Neuromag, Helsinki, Finland), consisting of
102 magnetometers and 204 orthogonal planar gradiometers.  Electrooculographic (EOG) data were recorded supra- and infraorbitally
(vertical EOG) as well as from the left vs right orbital rim (horizontal
EOG).  The signal was recorded continuously at a sampling rate of
600 Hz with an online bandpass ﬁlter from 0. 1 to 200 Hz.  The head
position relative to the sensor array was measured at the beginning of
the session with four head position indicator coils.  Prior to the recording session, the anatomical landmarks (nasion and auricular) and
extra points of the head shape were obtained with a 3D digitiser
(Fastrak Polhemus, Colchester, VA, USA).  Visually detectable bad
channels were removed prior to signal preprocessing.  External noise
was removed with the signal space separation method implemented
with MAX ﬁlter software (Taulu Name, 2004).  Further analyses were
performed with SPM8 (http://www. ﬁl. ion. ucl. ac. uk/spm/).  Data were
ﬁrst ﬁltered with a cutoﬀ of 150 Hz and downsampled to 300 Hz and
ﬁltered with a high cutoﬀ of 150 Hz.  We then epoched data fromTime-frequency (TF) representations of the data were performed
convoluting trial data with Morlet wavelets (7 cycles width), for the
interval 4–80 Hz in 1 Hz steps.  TF representations were computed independently for vertical and horizontal planar gradiometers, and then
averaged independently for each condition.  Averaged data from the
102 pairs of channels were combined over both directions, by means of
the Pythagoras rule, to obtain a single number positive-valued.  Finally,
averaged data were log-relative rescaled (dB) using the average power
from −400 ms to −100 ms preceding the onset of the memory array
(i. e. , 1600 ms before cue onset), to obtain TF power estimates for each
subject and each condition at 102 locations. 
1. 5. 1.  Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using non-parametric cluster
analysis as implemented in ﬁeldtrip (“http://www. ﬁeldtriptoolbox. 
org’) (Maris & Oostenveld, 2007) which controls for Type error I. 
First, time-frequency data were average in the alpha range (8–14 Hz).  A
t-test was then computed between each sensor-time point.  P-values
below 0. 05 were used to form clusters of adjacent time points and
electrodes.  A minimum of two channels were used to form a cluster. 
Cluster-level statistic was calculated by summing t-values within a
cluster.  Signiﬁcance of the cluster statistic was evaluated by a permutation test.  The permutation distribution was obtained by randomly
assigning the data to two subsets and calculating the maximum cluster
statistic.  A histogram of cluster statistics was obtained by repeating the
previous step 1000 times.  Cluster p-value is then obtained as the proportion of randomizations that are above the observed cluster-level
statistic. 
C.  Poch Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 63–70
Fig.  2.  TF representation of gradiometer sensors
during the maintenance period after retro-cue after
collapsing two-cue and one-cue conditions.  Power
changes are depicted as the log relative change (dB)
with respect to baseline.  Upper row depicts the
averaged TF representations of contralateral posterior sensors.  Lower row depicts the averaged TF
power for ipsilateral posterior sensors. 
1. 6.  Source analysis
The linearly constrained minimum variance scalar beamformer
spatial ﬁlter algorithm (Sekihara, Nagarajan, Poeppel, & Marantz,
2004), as implemented in SPM8, was used to generate maps of source
activity in a 10-mm grid, with the use of a single-shell forward model ﬁt
to the inner skull surface of the inverse normalised SPM template
(Nolte, 2003).  Coregistration to MNI space was carried out with the
three anatomical landmarks and the extra digitized points.  Based on the
results of the TF analysis, two 300 ms windows were deﬁned and Fast
Fourier Transform was applied with a Hanning window.  Spatial ﬁlter
was constructed based on the covariance matrix of all trials in the
frequency range of 8–14 Hz using a 10% regularization.  The spectral
resolution of a 300 ms window is 3. 33 Hz, thus, the frequency bins
included in the covariance matrix were 9. 9 Hz and 13. 3 Hz.  Only the
real part was utilized in the covariance matrix.  To explore the sources
relative to alpha desynchronization, the time covariance window corresponding to 300ms–0 ms before memory array presentation and
250–550 ms after cue onset was utilized.  Alpha increase was explored
using the time covariance window corresponding to 300 ms baseline
and the 550–850 ms interval after cue presentation.  Summary statistics
images were calculated based on the power spectral density by subtracting the baseline period (300 ms before memory array presentation)
image from the active time period, generating four volumetric images
for each participant.  The images were then smoothed using a Gaussian
kernel at 10 mm FWHM and subjected to a group random eﬀects analysis.  Average eﬀect of condition (this is, greater or lower activation
than baseline), was performed independently for the right- and lefthemiﬁeld conditions for each time interval by means of Student t-test. 
Signiﬁcant parametric maps were thresholded at p < 0. 05 FWE for the
whole brain volume.  To estimate the signiﬁcance of the main eﬀects of
hemisphere, hemiﬁeld, load and its interactions a 2 × 2 × 2 ANOVA
with Hemisphere (ipsilateral vs contralateral), Hemiﬁeld (left vs.  right),
and Load (one-cue vs.  two-cue) as main factors was performed. 
2.  Results
2. 1.  Behavioral results
Analysis of the behavioral data revealed that there was a signiﬁcant
beneﬁt in the use of the spatial retro-cue compared to when no spatial
information about the upcoming target was presented.  This beneﬁt was
observed both in accuracy and RT. 