
Working on a daily basis with patients in pain can be a trying experience for healthcare providers (HCPs).  Indeed, witnessing others in
pain can elicit a self-focused aversive reaction called personal distress
(Batson, 1987; Eisenberg & Eggum, 2009; Eisenberg & Fabes, 1990). 
This negative response to the suﬀering of others often motivates behavioral responses aimed at rapidly diminishing one’s own discomfort
instead of oﬀering help to alleviate the other person’s suﬀering (Batson,
1991; Cialdini Name, 1987; Tice, Bratslavsky & Baumeister, 2001). 
Successful regulation of personal distress is therefore necessary to feel
concern for others and oﬀer optimal help to persons(Eisenberg & Eggum, 2009; Eisenberg & Fabes, 1990).  Consequently,
HCPs in charge of treating pain in patients need to be able to adequately
regulate this self-oriented response in order to produce other-oriented
prosocial responses.  A study on HCPs’ neural response to pain in others
has validated this idea by showing that HCPs had, compared to control
participants, increased hemodynamic responses in regions associated
with self-regulation when witnessing painful stimulations applied
to patients, that is the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC) and the
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (Cheng Name, 2007).  Using a similar
design, Decety and collaborators (Decety, Yang & Cheng, 2010) observed that physicians did not show the typical diﬀerentiation observed
in control participants between electrocortical responses to pictures
depicting painful and non-painful stimulations to patients.  The authors
interpreted this result as a down-regulation in HCPs of aﬀective processing when perceiving pain in others, allowing them to allocate
cognitive resources to the assistance of others.  It is therefore plausible
that this increased self-regulation of personal distress when confronted
with others’ suﬀering could make HCPs more able to oﬀer help towards
persons in pain than individuals with no clinical experience. 
On the other hand, clinical expertise has also been linked with a
tendency to underestimate the pain of patients compared to the patients’ own estimation or the estimation of control participants (Cheng
Name, 2007; Decety Name, 2010; Kappesser, de C.  Williams & Prkachin,
2006; Prkachin, Solomon & Ross, 2007).  This underestimation bias has
been shown to extend across diﬀerent settings and to increase with the
amount of clinical experience (Gleichgerrcht & Decety, 2014; Solomon,
2001).  The fact that more experienced clinicians tend to underestimate
the pain of patients to a greater extent suggests that repeated exposure
⁎ Corresponding author at: École de psychologie, Pavillon Félix-Antoine-Savard, 2325, rue des Bibliothèques Université Laval, Québec, Québec, G1V 0A6, Canada. 
E-mail address: philip. jackson@psy. ulaval. ca (P. L.  Jackson). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 06. 005
Received 20 May 2016; Received in revised form 27 April 2017; Accepted 29 June 2017
Available online 30 June 2017
0301-0511/ 
M. -P.  Coll Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 1–10
to patients in pain could contribute to this bias (Prkachin Name, 2007). 
Several studies (Coll, Gr & goire, Prkachin, & Jackson, 2016; Gr & goire,
Coll, Tremblay, Prkachin, & Jackson, 2016; Prkachin, Mass, & Mercer,
2004; Prkachin & Rocha, 2010) added support to this hypothesis by
showing that participants with no healthcare experience brieﬂy exposed to intense expressions of pain are subsequently less willing to
consider moderate pain expressions as painful.  One immediate consequence of this bias in HCPs could be the inadequate management of
pain in patients.  Indeed, if the pain of the other is perceived as less
intense, it is likely that the observer will be less motivated to help relieve it (Prkachin, Kaseweter & Browne, 2015). 
Based on studies indicating that HCPs show increased emotional
regulation when witnessing pain, one would expect that they would
oﬀer more prosocial behavior towards persons in pain than non HCP
individuals because they can regulate self-oriented feelings of distress
more eﬀectively.  However, based on studies suggesting an underestimation of others’ pain intensity in HCPs, one would expect that
HCPs would oﬀer less prosocial behavior to persons in pain because
they perceive the pain of others as less intense than individuals with no
healthcare experience.  In order to shed light on these conﬂicting hypotheses, the present study compared HCPs and healthy control participants with no healthcare experience (CTL) on prosocial behavior towards persons in pain. 
In a ﬁrst experiment a behavioral paradigm was developed, in
which participants were asked to decide the amount of help they would
oﬀer patients expressing various levels of pain, knowing that oﬀering
more help would help reduce the patients’ pain but would have the
undesirable consequence of lengthening the experimental task.  In a
second experiment, functional neuroimaging was used in order to
provide additional insights into the cognitive mechanisms underlying
this eﬀect.  New groups of HCP and CTL participants performed the
same prosocial task in a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
setting.  It was hypothesized that compared to CTL participants, HCP
participants would show more prosocial behavior towards patients in
pain and that this would be linked to reduced self-reported personal
distress when witnessing others in pain and increased activation, during
the observation of patients in pain, in regions associated with selfregulation such as the DLPFC and the MPFC and decreased activation in
regions associated with aﬀective responses to pain in others such as the
anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and the anterior insular cortices.  It was
also predicted that increased hemodynamic responses when witnessing
pain in others in the DLPFC and MPFC would be linked with reduced
self-reported personal distress and increased prosocial behavior. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Participants
HCP and CTL participants were recruited through advertisements
sent to a university e-mail list, and all participants gave written informed consent to take part in these studies.  The Institut de réadaptation
en déﬁcience physique de Québec Research Ethics Committee approved
both studies and participants received a monetary compensation for
their involvement.  All participants received a ﬁxed monetary compensation independently of the time they spent helping during the experimental task.  Exclusion criteria for both studies included any reported history of painful, neurological or psychiatric disorder. 
Additional exclusion criteria for the fMRI experiment included any
contraindication to the MRI magnet, being over 40 years of age and
being left-handed.  Inclusion criteria for the HCP groups included
having practiced a certiﬁed healthcare profession with direct contact
with patients in pain for at least two years.  All HCPs recruited in this
study were either licensed physiotherapists or nurses that worked in a
hospital or rehabilitation setting.  Participants included in the CTL
groups had not studied in, and had no previous work experience in a
healthcare related ﬁeld. 
2. 1. 1.  Behavioral experiment
Fourty-four participants took part in the behavioral version of the
experiment.  Twenty-two were HCP (two males, 20 females) aged on
average 32. 