
Important clues to retrosplenial cortex (areas 29, 30) function come
from its connectivity.  This posterior cingulate region has dense interconnections with the anterior thalamic nuclei, as well as with hippocampal and parahippocampal regions [1–6].  Reﬂecting these connections, the rat retrosplenial cortex contributes to spatial memory and
navigation [7–12].  Despite these ﬁndings, it is clear that the retrosplenial cortex has a very diﬀerent role in spatial cognition from that of
the hippocampus and anterior thalamic nuclei.  Indeed, retrosplenial
lesion deﬁcits often only emerge when animals are required to switch
ﬂexibly between diﬀerent spatial strategies or competing cue types
[13–15].  Such evidence potentially points to a broader role for the
retrosplenial cortex in cognition beyond the spatial domain.  A consideration of its other anatomical connections is consistent with this
proposal.  Retrosplenial cortex is also heavily interconnected with the
anterior cingulate cortex [16–18] which, in turn, is closely connected
with other frontal areas, including prelimbic cortex [19].  Retrosplenial
cortex is also indirectly linked with prelimbic cortex via its dense
anterior thalamic and medial thalamic connections [16,19].  Yet, the
functional importance of these retrosplenial-frontal connections remains poorly understood. 
The present study, therefore, addressed the question of whether
retrosplenial cortex contributes to functions associated with the rodent
anterior cingulate and prelimbic cortices.  Preliminary support for this
view comes from the ﬁnding that retrosplenial cortex lesions disrupt a
rodent analogue of the Stroop task [20], which is also sensitive to
medial frontal cortex lesions [21].  In addition, retrosplenial cortex lesions can disrupt recency judgements [22], an ability closely associated
with medial frontal cortex function in rats [23–25] as well as crossmodal recognition memory [26,27]. 
To provide a more comprehensive answer, rats with retrosplenial
cortex lesions were tested on a series of four behavioural tasks thought
to rely on either the prelimbic cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, or both
cortical areas.  In Experiment 1, rats with retrosplenial cortex lesions
performed an attentional set-shifting task, previously shown to be
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: Powellal3@cf. ac. uk (A. L.  Powell). 
1 Anna Powell and Andrew Nelson are joint ﬁrst authors. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 010
Received 25 May 2017; Received in revised form 25 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 08 August 2017
0166-4328/ © 2017 The Authors.  Published by Elsevier B. V.  This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons. org/licenses/BY/4. 0/). 
A. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
Fig.  1.  Set-shifting task (Experiment 1).  (A) Schematic of the arena used for the set-shifting experiment.  Approximately one third of the length of the box was divided into two smaller
compartments.  The remaining area of the box was a single open space.  The two smaller sections could be separated from the larger area by a removable black Perspex panel.  A glass pot
(depicted by the clear circles) containing the digging medium was placed in each of the two smaller areas.  A third identical glass pot containing water was placed against the opposite wall
of the larger area (depicted by the “W”).  (B) Examples of possible stimulus pairings for each stage of the attentional set-shifting task.  A rewarded stimulus is indicated with + while −
indicates the nonrewarded stimulus in each pair.  Abbreviations: extra, extradimensional shift; intra, intradimensional shift. 
sensitive to lesions centred in prelimbic cortex [28].  These medial
frontal lesions produce a selective deﬁcit on extradimensional setshifting, the ability to switch from one class of reinforced cues to another [28], while more selective anterior cingulate lesions can impair
intradimensional set-shifting [29].  The latter experiment also examined
the retrosplenial (posterior cingulate) cortex, ﬁnding that restricted
lesions centred on mid anterior-posterior levels within the area can also
retard intradimensional shifts [29].  In Experiment 2, a second cohort of
rats with retrosplenial lesions was tested on a strategy switch task in an
automated chamber.  This task involved learning and then shifting between visual-based and response-based discriminations, switches that
are sensitive to inactivation of the medial frontal cortex in rats (Ragozzino Name [31]; Floresco Name [30]).  Both Experiments 1 and 2
included a reversal stage as this form of behavioural change can be
dissociated from shifting attention from one domain to another [28,32]. 
Lesions in the anterior cingulate cortex impair eﬀort-based decision
making, whilst other medial frontal cortex lesions can spare such tasks
[33].  We, therefore, trained the cohort of rats from Experiment 2 on an
operant cost-beneﬁt discrimination task (Experiment 3).  Such tasks pit
reward size against the eﬀort required to gain that reward [34].  Finally,
a third cohort of rats with retrosplenial lesions was trained on reinforced matching-to-place in a T-maze (Experiment 4).  Rats with
prelimbic cortex lesions show impaired acquisition as they persist with
the dominant preference to nonmatch and then spend longer resorting
to a side preference, before learning to match [35,36].  Anterior cingulate lesions also extend the period of nonmatching, but the animals
then switch at a rapid rate once that innate tendency has extinguished
[35].  Taken together, the various behavioural tasks were selected to
determine whether retrosplenial cortex lesions have eﬀects similar to
those seen after lesions in the anterior cingulate or prelimbic cortices. 
<Middle> Experiment 1: attentional set–shifting. 
The ﬁrst experiment consisted of a series of discriminations that
were completed in a single session [37,38].  The initial discriminations
helped to establish within-dimensional attention (intradimensional
shifts), while subsequent discriminations involved an extradimensional
shift, followed by a reversal of the preceding discrimination. 
2. 1.  Methods
2. 1. 1.  Subjects
Experiment 1 involved a single cohort (Cohort 1) of 28 male Lister
hooded rats (Harlan, Bicester, UK) weighing between 278 and 387 g at
the time of surgery.  Animals were housed in pairs under diurnal light
conditions (14 h light/10 h dark).  Behavioural testing occurred during
the light phase.  The rats were handled daily for a week prior to surgery
and then randomly assigned to one of two surgical groups: retrosplenial
cortex lesions (RSC1, n = 16) or surgical shams (Sham1, n = 12).  All
procedures were in accordance with the UK Animals (Scientiﬁc
Procedures) Act, 1986 and EU directive (2010/63/EU), as well as being
approved by local ethical committees at Cardiﬀ University.  Prior to
Experiment 1, the rats had been tested on a spatial discrimination task
and a spontaneous object recognition task [39].  The current experiment
began eight months after surgery. 
2. 1. 2.  Surgical proceduresinjection of 0. 1 ml Millophylline
Prior to surgery, rats received a subcutaneous injection of 0. 06 ml
Metacam (Boehringer Ingelheim, Alkmaar, NL, USA) and an intraperitoneal
(Arnolds
Veterinary Products Ltd, Shrewsbury, UK).  They were then deeply anaesthetised with an i. p.  injection of sodium pentobarbital (60 mg/kg
pentobarbital sodium salt; Sigma-Aldrich, U. K. ).  The rat was placed in a
stereotaxic frame with the nose bar at +5. 0 (David Kopf Instruments,
Tujunga, CA, USA).  The scalp was retracted and the cortex along the
midline exposed by a bilateral craniotomy, extending from bregma toLesions were produced by injecting 0. 09 M N-methyl-D-aspartate
solution (NMDA; Sigma, Poole, UK), dissolved in phosphate buﬀer (pH
7. 2), into seven bilateral injection sites via a 1 μl Hamilton syringe at a
rate of 0. 05 μl per minute (Bonaduz, Switzerland).  The injection coordinates were measured from bregma along the anterior-posterior (AP)
axis, from the central sinus along the lateral-medial (LM) axis, and from
the surface of the cortex for the dorsal-ventral (DV) axis.  The stereotaxic coordinates at each of the seven sites were as follows: AP −1. 6,
LM ± 0. 4, DV-1. 3; AP-2. 8, LM ± 0. 5, DV-1. 3; AP-4. 0, LM ± 0. 5,
DV-1. 3; AP-5. 3, LM ± 0. 5, DV-2. 6; AP-5. 3, LM ± 0. 9, DV-1. 6; AP-6. 6,
LM ± 1. 0, DV-2. 0; AP-7. 5, LM ± 1. 1, DV-1. 3.  The three most rostral
coordinates received injections of 0. 25 μl NMDA, the next three pairs of
sites received 0. 26 μl, with 0. 1 μl NMDA in the most caudal site. A. L.  Powell Name
2. 1. 3.  Apparatus
Rats were tested in an opaque, black Perspex box (69. 5 cm long x
40. 5 cm wide x 18. 6 cm deep).  The box was divided into two smaller
compartments along approximately one third of its length, with the
remaining area creating a single open space (Fig.  1A).  Removable
opaque Perspex panels controlled access to the two smaller sections
from the larger area.  Each of the three sections was covered by a separate, hinged transparent Perspex lid.  A glass pot (75 mm in diameter,
45 mm deep), containing the digging media, was placed in each of the
two smaller areas.  Given the duration of the test session, a third identical pot, containing water, was placed against the wall of the larger
area, furthest from the digging chambers (see Fig.  1A).  Rats were carried to and from the testing room in individual, opaque boxes. 
2. 1. 4.  Behavioural training
2. 1. 4. 1.  Pre-training.  Three days prior
to testing, each rat was
habituated to the full test arena for 10 min (no glass pots were
present).  On the second pre-training day, rats were returned to the
arena for another 10 min.  Now, both the smaller chambers were closed
oﬀ by the removable panels and the three glass pots were in place.  The
animal was initially placed in the larger chamber and the dividing
panels were raised and lowered at intervals (approximately every
2 min).  During this session both of the pots in the smaller chambers
(i. e. , the digging pots) were ﬁlled with clean bedding sawdust and
baited with half a Cheerio (Nestle, UK) and rats were trained to retrieve
the food from the pots.  Note that this stage was acquired relatively
quickly because all the animals had been previously trained on a similar
task [12].  The day before testing, rats were again placed in the arena
and pre-exposed to each of the test stimuli in turn.  Odours were mixed
with bedding sawdust and all
the diﬀerent digging media were
presented without odours added.  For all stimulus presentations, rats
were required to retrieve a buried Cheerio from each pot. 
2. 1. 4. 2.  Test.  On the Test Day, rats received a series of two-choice
(forced) discriminations in which only one stimulus dimension (i. e. ,
odour or texture; counterbalanced across rats) signalled reinforcement
(see Fig.  1B for examples).  Each rat completed all discriminations in a
single session.  For each discrimination, the two digging pots contained
diﬀerent media and/or odours and a single cheerio was placed in one of
the two pots.  The location of the reinforced pot (i. e. , in the left or right
chamber) was pseudo-randomly allocated across trials. 
At the start of each trial, a rat was placed in the large compartment
with the dividing doors restricting access to the both of the smaller
chambers.  A trial started once these doors were removed and the rat
had 10 min to ﬁnd the reward.  A ‘choice’ was deﬁned as the rat
breaking the surface of the digging medium with its paws or nose.  If the
rat chose the non-reinforced pot, the trial was marked as incorrect.  For
the ﬁrst four trials of each stage, if a rat made an incorrect choice, it was
allowed access to the correct pot to uncover the reward.  On subsequent
incorrect trials (i. e. , digging in a nonbaited pot), the trial was terminated once the rat returned to the large waiting area of the arena.  The
pots were re-baited during a 5 s ITI period.  A rat did not move onto the
next discrimination stage until it had reached a criterion of six correct
choices in a row.  Trials were scored by an experimenter blind to the
group identify of the rat. 
For the initial, simple discrimination (SD), the digging pots were
ﬁlled with either sawdust infused with two diﬀerent scents or with two
diﬀerent digging media (without odour).  Only one odour (or one
medium) was reinforced.  In the subsequent, complex discrimination
(CD) stage, the same odour or texture as for the simple discrimination
trials was reinforced, but now the irrelevant dimension, texture or
odour respectively, was also added (see Fig.  1B). 
The next four stages consisted of intradimensional training (ID1,
ID2, ID3, and ID4) in which diﬀerent compound stimuli were presented
for each discrimination, with the relevant dimension (i. e. , odour or
texture) remaining constant.  Thus, for the ﬁrst six stages of the task (SD,
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
CD, ID1, ID2, ID3, and ID4) the rats were required to attend to only one
stimulus dimension, while ignoring the other non-reinforced dimension
(see Fig.  1B).  This training was designed to encourage the formation of
an attentional set (i. e. , always attend to one dimension and ignore the
other, irrelevant dimension). 
After the fourth intradimensional discrimination (ID4), an extradimensional (ED) shift was introduced.  Again, diﬀerent compound stimuli were presented, however, now the previously irrelevant dimension
was reinforced (see Fig.  1B).  Consequently, rats had to attend to a
diﬀerent dimension in order to solve the discrimination.  Finally, the
reward contingencies established during the ED task were reversed
(REV) such that the previously non-reinforced stimulus was now reinforced and vice versa (see Fig.  1B). 
2. 1. 5.  Histology
After behavioural testing, rats were deeply anaesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (60 mg/kg, i. p. ; Euthatal; Merial Animal Health,
Harlow, UK) and transcardially perfused with 0. 1 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0. 1 M PBS
(PFA).  The brains were removed and placed in PFA for 4 h before being
transferred to 25% sucrose overnight at room temperature, with gentle
agitation.  A one-in-four series of coronal sections (40 μm) was cut on a
freezing microtome and stained using the Nissl stain, cresyl violet. 
Descriptions of the rat retrosplenial cortex follow those of van Groen
and Wyss [3,40,41].  In this nomenclature, the dysgranular cortex (area
30) is designated Rdg, while the granular cortex (area 29) is subdivided
into a more dorsal area, Rgb and a more ventral, caudal area, Rga [3]. 
2. 1. 6.  Data analysisto criterion were
analysed using mixed ANOVAs. 
Discrimination “Stage” (eight levels) provided a repeated-measures
factor, while “Group” was the between-subjects factor.  Switch cost
values were calculated for the extradimensional shift by subtracting the
trials to criterion for the ﬁnal intradimensional discrimination (ID4)
from the trials to criterion for the ED shift stage. 
Data from all of the four experiments described here were analysed
in R (V 3. 3. 2).  All ANOVAs were conducted in the ‘afex’ package using
the ‘aov_ez()’(Type 3 ANOVA) function (Singmann Name [42]).  Where
violations of sphericity occurred, degrees of freedom were adjusted
using the Greenhouse-Geisser correction. 
2. 2.  Results
2. 2. 1.  Histology
Of the 16 rats in group RSC1, three were excluded due either to
excessive sparing of retrosplenial cortex or because of marked bilateral
damage to the hippocampus.  In the remaining 13 RSC1 rats, the lesions
were largely as intended as extensive cell loss and gliosis was seen
throughout the retrosplenial cortex in both the granular and dysgranular subregions (Fig.  2A).  Three animals had restricted damage or
gliosis in the most dorsal medial tip of the CA1 subﬁeld of the hippocampus (two unilateral) below the rostral retrosplenial cortex.  In the
remaining case, the bilateral CA1 damage was extremely restricted.  Of
these three cases, the maximum extent of anterior–posterior hippocampal damage was limited to 600 μm.  In addition, seven animals,
including the three with CA1 damage, had slight unilateral thinning of
the medial blade of the dentate gyrus just caudal to the splenium.  Nine
animals had partial sparing of Rga, particularly at its caudal limit.  Four
rats also had some limited sparing of Rgb.  One rat had slight damage to
the anterior cingulate cortex at the junction with retrosplenial cortex,
and two showed limited unilateral damage to the secondary motor
cortex, lateral to the retrosplenial cortex.  A restricted area of gliosis was
observed at the junction of the anterior medial and anterior ventral
nuclei, as is consistently observed after extensive retrosplenial lesions
[9,43,44].  Following histological analyses the ﬁnal group sizes were;
RSC1 n = 13, Sham1, n = 12. A. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
Fig.  2.  Histology.  (A–C) Location and extent of the retrosplenial
cortex (RSC) lesions for each of the three cohorts.  The cases with
the largest (pale grey) and smallest (dark grey) cortical lesions are
depicted on a series of coronal sections The numbers refer to the
approximate distance, in mm, of each section caudal to bregma
[67].  (D) Photomicrographs from a representative lesion (top two
rows) and a surgical sham case (bottom two rows) from groups
RSC2 and Sham2.  Scale bars represent 200 μm. 
2. 2. 2.  Behaviour
When all eight discrimination stages were analysed together, there
was no overall group diﬀerence for trials to criterion (F1,23 = 1. 74
p = 0. 20; see Fig.  3A and Supplementary Table 1).  Likewise, there was
no interaction between Stage and Group (F < 1), though there was a
main eﬀect of Stage (F7161 = 36. 93 p < 0. 001). 
Further ANOVAs, conducted on the intradimensional shift stages
(ID1-4), conﬁrmed the improvement in performance across successive
discriminations (F3,69 = 38. 48 p < 0. 001; Fig.  3A).  This improvement
in discrimination performance is consistent with enhanced intradimensional attention, i. e. , successful set formation.  At the same
time, there were no Group diﬀerences in the number of trials to criterion (F1,23 = 1. 24 p = 0. 28).  Moreover, there was no interaction
between Group and ID stage (F < 1), indicating that the acquisition of
Fig.  3.  Attentional set-shifting (Experiment 1).  (A) Mean trials to criterion across the eight discrimination stages.  (B) Mean extradimensional switch cost values for the two groups.  Switch
cost values were calculated by subtracting the trials to criterion for the ﬁnal intradimensional discrimination (ID4) from the trials to criterion for the extradimensional (ED) shift stage. 
Error bars show ± SEM.  Other abbreviations: CD, complex discrimination; REV, reversal; SD, simple discrimination (see Fig.  1). A. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
the intradimensional attentional set was equivalent in the two groups. 
To examine more closely the eﬀect of the extradimensional shift
(ED), the switch-cost diﬀerence (i. e. , ED stage − ID4 stage) was calculated for each animal (Fig.  3B).  There was no group diﬀerence on this
measure (t < 1).  Furthermore, both the RSC1 (t12 = 10. 58 p < 0. 001)
and Sham1 (t11 = 14. 03 p < 0. 001) groups showed a signiﬁcant
switch cost (i. e. , increased trials to criterion for the ED stage relative to
the ID4 stage).  Moreover, there was no lesion eﬀect on the subsequent
reversal stage (t < 1, Fig.  3A).  Note, comparable analyses based on
errors rather than trials to criterion gave the same pattern of results
throughout. 
3.  Experiment 2: strategy-shift
The ﬁrst experiment found no evidence that retrosplenial cortex
lesions disrupt the acquisition of an intradimensional learning set, or
aﬀect the ability to switch dimensions.  To examine these forms of
learning more fully, the next experiment used an automated chamber to
test the ability to shift between response-based and visual-based discriminations.  The task was closely based on one described by Floresco3. 1.  Methods
3. 1. 1.  Subjects
Experiment 2 involved a second cohort (Cohort 2) of 30 male Lister
Hooded rats (ENVIGO, Bicester, UK).  At the time of surgery, the rats
weighed 309–356 g.  Animals were housed in groups of four under
diurnal light conditions (14 h light/10 h dark), with all behavioural
testing during the light phase.  Prior to surgery, the rats were handled
daily for a week and then randomly assigned to one of two surgical
groups: retrosplenial cortex lesions (RSC2, n = 15) or surgical shams
(Sham2, n = 15). 
3. 1. 2.  Surgical procedures
The general surgical procedures followed Experiment 1 but only six
bilateral injections of NMDA were made.  This reﬁnement was made in
order to reduce the surgery time and to minimise the risk of excessive
bleeding.  Rats were deeply anaesthetised (1 ml/kg, i. p.  injection) with
6% sodium pentobarbital solution (Ceva Animal Health, Libourne,
France).  Anaesthesia was then maintained with isoﬂurane (∼0. 5%) in
O2 for the duration of the surgery.  Injection coordinates were calculated
in the same way as Experiment 1 except that the dorsal-ventral (DV)
coordinates (in mm) were taken from the height of the dura.  The stereotaxic coordinates at each of the six sites were as follows: (#1) −1. 8
(AP), ± 0. 5 (ML), −1. 0 (DV); (#2) −2. 8 (AP), ± 0. 5 (ML), −1. 1 (DV);
(#3) −4. 0 (AP), ± 0. 5 (ML), −1 (DV); (#4) −5. 3 (AP), ± 0. 5 (ML),
−2. 5 (DV); (#5) −5. 3 (AP), ± 0. 9 (ML), −1. 4 (DV); (#6) −6. 6
(AP), ± 0. 9 (ML), −1. 8 (DV).  A volume of 0. 25 μl of NDMA was injected at the ﬁrst three pairs of sites (#1-3) while 0. 27 μl was injected in
the remaining sites.  All animals also received an injection of atropine
(0. 06 ml of a 600 μg/ml solution, Martindale Pharma, Brentwood, UK). 
3. 1. 3.  Apparatus
All instrumental training was conducted in a set of eight operant
boxes (Med Associates Inc. , St Albans, VT), each measuring 240 mm
high x 240 mm deep x 300 mm wide.  The boxes were arranged in two
rows of four.  Each box had two aluminium walls, with a clear Perspex
front, back, and ceiling.  The grid ﬂoor comprised 19 parallel stainless
steel bars spaced 16 mm apart.  Each operant box was housed in its own
sound and light attenuating chamber. 
During training, sucrose pellet reinforcers (45 mg; P.  J.  Noyes,
Lancaster, NH) were delivered into a recessed food magazine situated in
the centre of the right-hand wall of the operant box.  The magazines
were ﬁtted with a pair of infra-red detectors that recorded magazine
entry and exit.  Retractable ﬂat-panel levers were inserted to the left
and/or right of the magazine at the start of each session and retracted
when the session ended.  Equipment control and data recording were via
an IBM-compatible PC equipped with MED-PC software (Med
Associates Inc. , St Albans, VT). 
3. 1. 4.  Behavioural training
3. 1. 4. 1.  Pre-training.  Before being introduced to the operant chambers,
rats were habituated to the sucrose pellets in their home cages.  The
following day, all animals received a single session of magazine training
during which reinforcers were delivered into the food magazine on a
variable interval 60 s schedule (i. e. , on average, one pellet per minute). 
After magazine training,
the animals completed two sessions of
continuous reinforcement (one on each lever, counterbalanced across
animals), during which one lever was inserted into the operant chamber
and every lever press was reinforced.  The animal was required to press
the lever at least 50 times in 30 min before proceeding to the next stage. 
If this criterion was not met, the animal completed additional sessions
on that lever until they reached criterion. 
In the ﬁnal stage of pre-training, either the left or the right lever was
presented on a given trial.  The side on which the lever was presented
was random for the ﬁrst trial of a pair and the opposite lever was then
presented on the subsequent trial.  Trials commenced with illumination
of the house light and the insertion of the lever.  If the animal made a
response within 10 s of the lever being inserted, a pellet was delivered,
the lever retracted and, after 4 s, the house light was switched oﬀ.  If the
animal failed to make a response within 10 s, the lever was retracted,
the house light switched oﬀ and the trial counted as an omission.  Each
session consisted of 90 trials (45 left lever/45 right lever) and all animals completed at least four sessions.  If an animal made more than ﬁve
omissions in the ﬁnal session it received another session until this criterion was met (i. e. , ≤5 omissions). 
3. 1. 4. 2.  Discrimination training.  All animals learnt two discrimination
strategies (visual and response discrimination stages), which required
the use of diﬀerent cues to earn food reinforcement.  In addition,
animals completed sessions in which each of these strategies was
reversed (visual reversal and response reversal stages).  The order in
which the discrimination stages were completed was the same for all
animals (Fig.  4). 
Each session terminated after the animal had completed at least 60
trials and had reached a performance criterion of 10 consecutive correct
responses, or after 120 trials.  All animals received at least two sessions
on each discrimination stage and needed to be at criterion over two
sessions, with the additional stipulation that they made fewer than 20%
errors on the ﬁnal session, before progressing to the next stage.  This
requirement helped to ensure that the animals had suﬃciently learnt
the discrimination in order for that session to be used as a baseline from
which to calculate the switch-cost ratio. 
3. 1. 4. 3.  Visual-Guided discrimination.  All animals completed the VisualGuided Discrimination ﬁrst (Fig.  4).  Here, one of the stimulus lights
(left or right) was illuminated at the start of each trial.  Three seconds
later both levers were inserted into the operant chamber and the house
light illuminated.  A response on the lever below the illuminated
stimulus light (correct response) resulted in the delivery of a single
pellet, the extinguishing of the stimulus light, and the retraction of the
levers.  After 4 s the house light was extinguished, signalling the start of
the 20 s inter-trial interval (ITI).  Following an incorrect response (i. e. , a
response on the other lever) the chamber immediately reverted to the
ITI state.  If the animals failed to make a response within 10 s of the trial
starting, the chamber reverted to the inter-trial state (Fig.  4).  The order
of the correct lever (left or right) was random for the ﬁrst trial of a pair,
while in each pair of trials both the left and right lever were presented. 
For example, on the ﬁrst trial of a session there was an equal probability
of either the left or right lever being presented, whilst on the second
trial the opposite lever was always presented.  Then, on the third trial,A. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
Fig.  4.  Strategy-shift task (Experiment 2).  Schematic showing the order of the discrimination stages and basic trial structure for the strategy-shift task.  The black boxes show the points at
which a new discrimination strategy was introduced. 
the probability of the either lever being presented was again equal, and
so on for the entire session. sameasessentially
3. 1. 4. 4.  Response discrimination.  The Response Discrimination trialsthe Visual-Guided
Discrimination stage (Fig.  4).  However, now, either the left or right
lever was designated as the ‘correct’ lever (counterbalanced across
animals); only responses on this lever were reinforced.  The stimulus
light was still presented above one of the levers so that, over the course
of the session, for half of the trials the light was illuminated above the
correct lever (‘Congruent trials’) and for remaining trials the light was
above the incorrect lever (‘Incongruent trials’). 
training.  After reaching criterion on the
3. 1. 4. 5.  Response reversal
Response Discrimination,the levers were reversed such that
previously incorrect lever was now reinforced and vice versa.  All other
conditions remained the same as in the previous stages. 
reversal
training.  After
reaching criterion on the
3. 1. 4. 6.  Visual
Response Reversal,
training was paused to allow all animals to
complete this stage.  Thus, to ensure that all animals were at a similar
stage of performance, before progressing on to the next stage, they all
completed two Response Reversal reminder sessions during which the
same lever was reinforced as for the Response Reversal stage.  If they
reached criterion on both sessions they moved on to the next stage. 
The training sessions now reverted back to the initial Visual-Guided
Discrimination strategy.  Once a rat performed at criterion, the strategy
reversed such that now the animal had to learn that the stimulus light
signalled the incorrect lever. 
3. 1. 5.  Data analysis
the eﬀects of a strategy switch on the groups, the ﬁrst session of each
stage (i. e. , when a new strategy was introduced) was split into blocks of
10 trials and the ﬁrst six blocks (i. e. , 60 trials) were analysed separately
for each stage using a mixed ANOVA with the factors Block (1–6) andSwitch cost values were calculated for each animal by subtracting
the total number of errors during the ﬁrst session of a given stage from
the total errors during the ﬁnal session of the previous stage.  For each
group, at each stage, these switch cost diﬀerences were analysed using
one sample t-tests (mean switch cost > 0). 
In addition, for the Response Discrimination and Visual Reminder
stages (i. e. , stages where a strategy shift was required, as opposed to a
simple reversal), trials were classiﬁed according to whether or not the
correct lever was the same as it would have been for the previous
discrimination (i. e. , Congruent trials) or diﬀerent (i. e. , Incongruent
trials).  For example, during the Response Discrimination stage the light
was illuminated above the correct lever (i. e. , a Congruent trial) on half
of the trials, meaning that the discrimination could be solved using the
previously learnt strategy (i. e. , press the lever with the light above it). 
Conversely, in order to select the correct lever on Incongruent trials
(i. e. , when the light was illuminated above the incorrect lever) the
animal had to inhibit the previously learnt strategy.  Therefore, errors
‘Perseverative’. 
made on Incongruent
Perseverative errors rates were analysed as a fraction of overall errorsthe ﬁrst Response
Discrimination session and, in a separate ANOVA, for the ﬁrst six blocks
of the ﬁrst Visual Reminder session. 
trials were categorised as
(i. e. , 60 trials) of
six blocks
the ﬁrst
3. 2.  Results
3. 2. 1.  Histology
Mean trials and errors to criterion for each stage were compared
between the groups using a mixed ANOVA with the repeated (within)
factor Stage and the between-factor Group.  To examine more closely
Two animals from group RSC2 were excluded due to substantial
bilateral damage in dorsal CA1.  Of the remaining 13 animals, ﬁve had
lesions centred in the dysgranular retrosplenial cortex.  One of these ﬁveA. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
cases had almost complete sparing of the granular cortex both anterior
and posterior to the splenium.  In the remaining four cases, some cell
loss was evident in the deeper layers of the granular cortex.  A sixth
animal had appreciable unilateral sparing in granular retrosplenial
cortex anterior to the splenium (Fig.  2B). 
The remaining seven RSC2 animals showed considerable bilateral
cell loss in both the granular and dysgranular cortices, both anterior
and posterior to the splenium (Fig.  2B).  In some cases, this cell loss was
particularly evident in the more superﬁcial cell layers (Fig.  2).  In two of
these cases there was a small amount of sparing in granular retrosplenial cortex close to the anterior cingulate border.  Caudal to the
splenium, there was often some sparing in the most caudal parts of area
Rga.  Three cases had extremely restricted, unilateral cell loss in the
dorsal medial CA1, below the rostral retrosplenial cortex.  In one case,
the lesion encroached into the most caudal anterior cingulate cortex. 
Following histological analyses the ﬁnal group sizes were; RSC2
n = 13, Sham2, n = 15. 
3. 2. 2.  Behaviour
In addition to histological exclusions, a further four animals (two
Sham2 and two RSC2) were excluded due to technical problems affecting the ﬁrst Visual-Guided Discrimination (the lights in one of the
operant chambers were found to be incorrectly conﬁgured).  In total,
data from 11 RSC2 and 13 Sham2 animals were compared.  Of the 11
RSC2 animals, four had bilateral sparing in granular retrosplenial
cortex (as described above).  Therefore, to assess the eﬀect of granular
sparing, the RSC2 group was split by lesion size (Complete: n = 7;
Dysgranular: n = 4).  There were no diﬀerences between the groups in
the number of errors or trials to criterion (F < 1).  Furthermore, there
was no interaction with Stage for either errors (F1. 7,15. 4 = 1. 08
p = 0. 35) or trials to criterion (F < 1).  Therefore, for all further analyses combined these two subgroups. 
3. 2. 3.  Overall comparisons
When all ﬁve discrimination stages were analysed together, there
was no overall diﬀerence in either overall errors or trials to criterion
between the groups.  Furthermore, there was no interaction between
Group and Stage for either of these measures (all F < 1). 
3. 2. 4.  Within-stage comparisons
All rats completed a minimum of 60 trials on the ﬁrst session of each
discrimination stage (analysed as six blocks of ten trials).  Therefore, to
examine more closely the eﬀects of a strategy switch, these 60 trials
were split into blocks of 10 trials and error rates over these blocks were
analysed separately for each stage, using a mixed ANOVA with the
factors Block (1–6) and Group. 
Error rates decreased across these ﬁrst six blocks of the VisualGuided Discrimination (F5110 = 4. 16 p = 0. 002), with no diﬀerence in
error rates between the groups across the same blocks (F < 1) and no
interaction between Group and Block (F5110 = 1. 78 p = 0. 12; Fig.  5A). 
For the ﬁrst session of the Response Discrimination there was a main
eﬀect of Group (F5,22 = 18. 45 p < 0. 001), with the RSC2 group
making fewer errors than the Sham2 group (Fig.  5A).  There was also an
interaction between Group and Block (F5110 = 2. 48 p = 0. 04).  Simple
eﬀects analysis revealed that RSC2 animals made signiﬁcantly fewer
errors than Sham animals in blocks four (F1,22 = 13. 77 p = 0. 001), ﬁve
(F1,22 = 6. 50 p = 0. 02) and six (F1,22 = 11. 06 p = 0. 003; see Fig.  5A),
consistent with a faster rate of acquisition.  Note that because all rats
were trained to a criterion, performance was matched prior to the next
stage (Response Reversal). 
In the ﬁrst session of the Response Reversal stage, error rates decreased across the six blocks (F3. 4,74. 7 = 11. 87, p < 0. 001), with no
eﬀect of Group or Group by Block interaction (F < 1).  Likewise, overall
error rates decreased on the Visual Reversal stage (F5110 = 5. 04
p = 0. 04), but not
for the Visual Reminder stage (F5110 = 1. 30
p = 0. 28).  There was no main eﬀect of Group, or Group by Block
Fig.  5.  Strategy-shift (Experiment 2).  (A) Mean errors made during the ﬁrst 60 trials (6
block of 10 trials) of the ﬁrst session of each discrimination stage.  (B) Mean switch cost
values for each stage.  Switch cost values were calculated for each animal by subtracting
the total errors during the ﬁrst session of a given stage from the total errors during the
ﬁnal session of the previous stage.  (C) Fraction of perseverative errors.  Trials were
classiﬁed according to whether or not the correct lever was the same as it would have
been for the previous discrimination (i. e. , Congruent trials) or diﬀerent (i. e. , Incongruent
‘Perseverative’. 
trials).  Errors made on incongruent
Perseverative errors are presented as a fraction of overall errors for the ﬁrst six blocks of
the ﬁrst Response Discrimination session (left panel) and the ﬁrst session of the ﬁrst
Visual Reminder session (right panel).  Error bars show ± SEM.  Abbreviations: Rev, reversal. 
trials were categorised as
interaction, on error rates for either of these discrimination stages (all
p > 0. 05; Fig.  5A). 
3. 2. 5.  Switch cost comparisons
Importantly, both groups showed a signiﬁcant switch cost (total
errors during the ﬁnal session of a given stage − total number of errors
during the ﬁrst session of the subsequent stage) at all discrimination
stages (all p ≤ 0. 001, one sample t test; Fig.  5B).  There was no main
eﬀect of Group on the switch cost diﬀerences and no interactionA. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
between Stage and Group (F1. 8,39. 2 = 1. 14 p = 0. 33; Fig.  5B). 
3. 2. 6.  Congruent and incongruent trials: error analysis
Congruent trials were those in which the correct response was accompanied by a light above the same lever (i. e. , congruent with the
previous discrimination).  Errors made on incongruent
trials were
therefore termed “perseverative”.  Whilst the overall number of errors
made during the ﬁrst 60 trials of the ﬁrst Response discrimination stage
diﬀered between the groups, there was no overall diﬀerence between
the groups in the fraction of preservative errors made during this period
(F < 1) nor was there a Group by Block interaction (F < 1; Fig.  5C). 
Similarly, there was no group diﬀerence in the fraction of perseverative
errors made during the Visual Reminder stage or Group by Block interaction (F < 1; Fig.  5C). 
4.  Experiment 3: cost-beneﬁt discrimination
Experiment 2 revealed a selective lesion eﬀect, with the RSC2 animals making fewer errors after switching from a visual-cue to a response-based strategy.  Lesions in the anterior cingulate cortex impair
eﬀort-based decision making, whilst medial prefrontal cortex lesions
can spare such tasks [33].  We, therefore, trained all rats in the RSC2
cohort on an operant task based on similar principles (Fig.  6). 
4. 1.  Methods
4. 1. 1.  Subjects
For subject information and details of surgery see Experiment 2. 
4. 1. 2.  Apparatus
The same set of operant chambers were used as for Experiment 2. 
For this experiment, food pellets were used for reinforcement, rather
than sucrose, to reduce the transfer of learning from the strategy-shift4. 1. 3.  Behavioural training
4. 1. 3. 1.  Pre-training.  At the start of training, all animals completed a
single 30 min magazine training session, during which food pellets were
delivered on a variable interval 60 s schedule.  The magazine light was
illuminated for 6 s following pellet delivery.  During the next session,
rats were trained to press the levers on a ﬁxed ratio 1 schedule (FR1,
one lever press = 1 pellet).  The house light remained on for the entire
session and the magazine light was illuminated as a pellet was
delivered,
the magazine light remaining lit for 4 s.  Each animal
received a total of four 15 min sessions of FR1 training, two sessions
on each lever, on alternate days (counterbalanced across subjects). 
4. 1. 3. 2.  Forced sessions.  The start of a trial was
signalled by
illumination of the house light and the magazine light (Fig.  6).  A
time limit of 10 s for latency to the ﬁrst magazine entry and for all lever
press responses was also introduced: if an animal failed to make a
magazine response within 10 s of the trial start, or if they failed to make
a lever press within 10 s after the initial magazine entry or previous
lever response, the trial was terminated and counted as an omission. 
There was a 60 s time out after an omission trial during which all lights
were extinguished and the levers retracted.  After the ﬁrst magazine
entry response, the magazine light was extinguished and either the left
or right lever was extended.  A single lever press resulted in the delivery
of a food pellet and the illumination of the magazine light.  The
magazine light remained on for six seconds after which the trial was
ended and all lights extinguished.  After an ITI of four seconds, the
house light and magazine light were illuminated, signalling the start of
a new trial.  Animals completed 48 trials, with the left lever presented
on half the trials and the right lever presented on the other half.  For the
ﬁrst trial of a pair there was an equal probability of either the left or the
right lever being presented, with the opposite lever presented on the
second trial of a pair.  The subsequent three sessions followed the same
basic structure but the ITI was increased from four seconds to 10 s–20 s,
respectively.  Similarly, the FR was increased from one to two to four
Fig.  6.  Cost-beneﬁt task (Experiment 3).  Schematic showing the order of all stages, and basic trial structure, of the cost-beneﬁt task.  Abbreviations: C = choice trials; F = forced trials;
FR = ﬁxed ratio. A. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
Fig.  7.  Cost-beneﬁt task (Experiment 3).  (A) Mean trials to criterion for the FR8 stage.  Criterion = average of > 90% HRwd choices across two sessions.  (B) Mean fraction of high reward
(HRwd) lever choices across the six sessions for the FR12, FR16 and FR16-1 stages.  The fraction of HRwd choices was calculated by dividing the number of HRwd choices by the total
number of choice trials.  Error bars show ± SEM. 
lever presses. 
4. 1. 3. 3.  Cost-Beneﬁt discrimination: forced sessions.  For all subsequent
sessions (Fig.  6), either the left or right lever was designated as the high
reward lever (HRwd) and the other lever as low reward (LRwd).  The
position of the HRwd and LRwd (i. e. , left or right) was counterbalanced
between subjects and remained the same for the duration of the
experiment.  For the ﬁrst four sessions of this phase of training, all
trials were forced (i. e. , either the left or the right lever was presented)
and the trial structure was the same as for the ﬁnal session of the
previous stage. 
Initially both the LRwd and HRwd levers were
reinforced on an FR4 schedule but, for trials in which the HRwd lever
was presented, the animals received 4 food pellets whilst only two
pellets were delivered for LRwd trials. 
A time limit of 10 s for latency to the ﬁrst magazine entry and for all
lever press responses was also introduced: if an animal failed to make a
magazine response within 10 s of the trial start, or if they failed to make
a lever press within 10 s after the initial magazine entry or previous
lever response, the trial was terminated and counted as an omission. 
There was a 60 s time out after an omission trial during which all lights
were extinguished and levers retracted.  The standard ITI remained at
20 s for the ﬁrst session of this stage and was increased to 30 s and then
45 s for the second and third sessions, respectively.  In the ﬁnal session
of this stage the ITI was 60 s minus the time taken for the FR4 schedule
to be completed (Fig.  6). sessions.  All
4. 1. 3. 4.  Cost-beneﬁt discrimination:
subsequent
sessions consisted of a mix of
forced and choice trials (Fig.  6). 
Initially, there were two choice trials for every four forced trials.  On
choice trials, both levers were presented at the start of the trial and,
after the ﬁrst lever press, the other lever was immediately retracted.  All
animals completed at least two sessions of this stage and were given an
additional session if they failed to make > 60% HRwd choices on the
second session.  They then moved on to the next stage, in which they
were given four choice trials for every two forced trials.  To start with,
the ﬁxed ratio was set at FR4 for both levers.  Animals completed at least
two such sessions and once they made an average of > 90% HRwd
choices across two sessions, an eﬀort diﬀerential was introduced for the
HRwd vs LRwd lever. 
Initially, the ﬁxed-ratio for the low reward (LRwd) lever was kept at
FR4, whilst the ﬁxed-ratio for the high reward (HRwd) lever wasincreased to FR8.  Again, the criterion for completing this stage was set
at an average of > 90% HRwd choices across two sessions.  If an animal
failed to reach this criterion after 14 FR8 sessions, their data were excluded from the analysis. 
Once the criterion had been reached, the HRwd ﬁxed ratio was increased to FR12.  All animals that made it to this stage completed six
sessions, after which the HRwd ﬁxed-ratio was increased to FR16.  The
animals completed a further six sessions of this stage before moving on
to the ﬁnal stage, during which the reinforcement diﬀerential between
the two levers was increased by reducing the LRwd lever reinforcement
rate from two pellets to one (FR16-1; see Fig.  6). 
4. 1. 4.  Data analysis
For each session, the fraction of HRwd choices was calculated by
dividing the number of HRwd choices by the total number of choice
trials (i. e. , 32).  These values were then compared between the groups
for each stage separately.  For the FR8 stage, because the animals
completed diﬀerent numbers of sessions, HRwd choice fractions were
averaged across session and compared between the two groups using an
independent samples t-test.  For the FR12, FR16, and FR16-1 stage,
HRwd choice fractions across sessions were analysed between groups
using a mixed ANOVA. 
4. 2.  Results
See Experiment 2 and Fig.  2B for details of lesion placement and
exclusions.  A further three animals were excluded from the analysis
(one RSC2 and two Sham2) because they failed to reach the FR8 stage
criterion.  Final group sizes for Experiment 3 were; RSC2 n = 12; Sham2
n = 13.  Of the 12 RSC2 animals, four had bilateral sparing in granular
retrosplenial cortex (as described above).  Therefore, to assess the eﬀect
of granular sparing, the RSC2 group was split by lesion size (Complete:
n = 8; Dysgranular: n = 4).  There were no diﬀerences between these
two groups, or interactions with session, in the mean HRwd choice
fractions for the any of the stages (all p < 0. 05). 
4. 2. 1.  Behaviour
The mean fraction of HRwd choices made during the ﬁrst session of
each of the stages was analysed using a one-sample t-test to determine if
it was above the chance score of 0. 5.  Both groups were signiﬁcantly
above chance for the ﬁrst FR8 session (RSC3: t11 = 7. 44 p < 0. 001;
A. L.  Powell Name
Sham3: t12 = 14. 27, p < 0. 001; Fig.  7A) and the ﬁrst FR12 session
(RSC3: t11 = 5. 8, p < 0. 001; Sham3: t12 = 3. 67, p = 0. 001; Fig.  7B). 
Both groups were, however, at chance for the ﬁrst session of the FR16
and FR16-1 stages (t < 1).  Neither group improved on the FR16 stage,
so that their scores were still not above chance levels by the ﬁnal, sixth
session (RSC3: t11 = −0. 60, p = 0. 56; Sham3: t12 = −2, p = 0. 07;
Fig.  7B).  The pattern was diﬀerent, however, for the FR16-1 stage as
both groups now appeared to discriminate the contingencies.  This difference was most evident in the RSC3 group, which was above chance
during the ﬁnal session of the FR16-1 stage (t11 = 4. 03, p = 0. 002;
Fig.  7B).  Meanwhile, whilst the Sham3 group’s performance was still at
chance (Sham3: t12 = 1. 72, p = 0. 112; Fig.  7B) they had greatly improved (from 47% HRwd choices at Session 1–68% at Session 6). 
There was no group diﬀerence in the mean sessions to criterion for
the FR8 stage (t < 1; Fig.  7A).  Nor were there any Group diﬀerences, or
Group by Session interactions, for the FR12, FR16 and FR16-1 stages
(F < 1; Fig.  7B).  There was no main eﬀect of session during either the
FR12 (F2. 3,52. 8 = 2. 56 p = 0. 08) or FR16 stages (F1. 9,44. 6 = 2. 42,
p = 0. 1).  Conversely, when the value of the LRwd lever was dropped
from two pellets to one (i. e. , the FR16-1 stage) there was a main eﬀect
of session (F2. 2,50. 7 = 14. 21 p < 0. 001), with the fraction of HRwdincreasing from Session 1 to Session 6 (F1,24 = 15. 04
p < 0. 001),
5.  Experiment 4: matching-to-place
No evidence was found from Experiment 3 that retrosplenial lesions
disrupt the balance between reward size and cost.  Next, a new cohort of
operated rats was trained in a T-maze on a reinforced test of spatial
working memory.  The critical feature was that, following a baited
sample run, rats were reinforced for returning to the same side arm of
the T-maze.  This matching-to-place behaviour is contrary to their innate bias to nonmatch [45,46]. 
5. 1.  Methods
5. 1. 1.  Subjects
Experiment 4 involved a new cohort (RSC3) of male Lister hooded
rats.  Training started approximately 2 months post-surgery.  Details of
housing and husbandry are the same as the previous experiments.  Prior
to the current experiment, all rats completed a single appetitive operant5. 1. 2.  Surgical procedures
The surgical procedures followed Cohort 2 (Experiments 2 and 3). 
5. 1. 3.  Apparatus
All testing took place in a modiﬁable cross-maze (Fig.  8).  Each of the
four arms was 70 cm long and 10 cm wide with wooden ﬂoor and clear
Perspex walls (17 cm high).  One of the arms was blocked oﬀ for the
entire experiment to form a T-shaped maze.  At the end of each cross
arm there was a circular food well in which sucrose pellets (45 mg,
Sandown Instruments, UK) were placed during training.  The stem of the
T-maze was designated as the start arm and remained so for the entire
experiment.  Consequently, the T-maze remained in the same orientation throughout.  An aluminium barrier could be positioned ∼25 cm
from the end of the start arm to create a start area.  The maze, was
elevated on a 94 cm high stand and was situated in a rectangular room
(280 cm × 280 cm × 210 cm) that had salient visual cues attached to
the walls. 
5. 1. 4.  Behavioural training
5. 1. 4. 1.  T-maze matching-to-place.  Each session consisted of six trials
and all animals completed one session a day.  Each session consisted of
three correct
trials, presented in a
pseudorandom order.  Each trial comprised two stages, a ‘sample run’
left and three correct rightBehavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
followed by a ‘test run’.  At the start of each trial, two sucrose pellets
were placed in each food well and a metal barrier was placed at the
choice point of the T-maze, thereby closing one cross arm (Fig.  8). 
On a sample run, the animal was placed in the start area and the
aluminium barrier removed, allowing the rat to run down the start arm. 
Because of the metal barrier blocking the entrance to one of the cross
arms, the rat could only enter the one open arm.  Once the rat had
collected the sucrose pellets from the well at the end of the open arm,
the rat was returned to the start area, where it remained for 10 s while
the barrier at the choice point was removed and the same arm as previously visited was rebaited.  The test run started as the start arm barrier
was raised, allowing the animal a free choice between the two cross
arms of the T-maze.  The animal was deemed to have chosen an arm
when it had placed a hindfoot within that arm; no retracing was allowed.  If the rat had “matched”, i. e. , had entered the arm previously
visited on the sample run, it was allowed to eat the food reward and was
then returned to the holding box.  If the incorrect arm (i. e. , the arm not
previously visited on the sample run) was entered, the rat was allowed
to run to the end of the arm and then returned to the holding box.  The
rats were tested in groups of three or four with each rat completing one
trial before being returned to the holding box and waiting until all the
other rats in the group had completed one trial, so that the inter-trial
interval was typically between 3 and 4 min. 
Initially, all rats completed 30 days (i. e. , 180 trials) of matching
training.  These 30 sessions were followed by a ﬁve week break from Tmaze training, during which the rats carried out no other tasks.  All
animals then received a further eight sessions of matching training, to
ensure their performance was back up to criterion, before moving on to
the nonmatching task. 
nonmatching-to-place.  The5. 1. 4. 2.  T-maze
nonmatching-to-place task was the same as the matching task, except
that the rule was reversed, i. e. , the correct test arm was the arm not
visited on the sample run.  All animals completed 16 sessions (i. e. , 96
trials) of nonmatching training. 
structure5. 1. 4. 3.  Data analysis.  For both the matching and nonmatching tasks,
the total number of correct trials was calculated for blocks of 12 trials
(i. e. , two sessions).  These scores were then analysed using a mixed
ANOVA with the repeated measures factor Block and the between
subjects factor Group. 
In addition, for both the matching and nonmatching tasks, acquisition was divided into two phases: “perseveration” and “learning”
[35].  The perseveration phase was deﬁned as the period when rats were
performing signiﬁcantly below chance (≤3 out of 12, p = 0. 073 binomial distribution).  For the matching rule, this period corresponds to
when rats were attempting to solve the matching task by relying on the
innate instinct to alternate [47].  For the nonmatching task, this perseveration period reﬂects the continued use of the previously learnt
matching strategy.  The learning phase corresponded to when performance was at, or above, chance (i. e. , when the rats had overcome the
innate alternation bias [matching] or when they had successfully learnt
the new strategy [nonmatching]).  The two phases were deﬁned by
analysing the correct responses in a running window of 12 trials. 
Starting at trials 1–12 and advancing one trial at a time, the perseveration phase ended, and the learning phase began, at the point at
which a rat achieved a score of ≥4 correct trials within a 12 trial
window.  Errors were normalised by the total number of trials in each
phase (i. e. ,
Error fractionTotal errorsin phase
trials in phase ). 
Finally, the degree of side bias displayed by each animal was deﬁned for each session of the learning phase for both the matching and
nonmatching tasks.  The side bias was only calculated for those sessions
in which all six of the trials were classiﬁed as learning trials; sessions
containing a mix of perseveration and learning trials were excluded.  A
side bias session was deﬁned as any session in which the rat turned in
A. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
Fig.  8.  T-maze: matching and nonmatching (Experiment 4). 
The upper panels show the mean percentage correct scores
across the matching (left panel) and nonmatching (right
panel) tasks.  The dotted line marks the chance performance
level.  Asterisks show when the performance of each group
was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from chance (p < 0. 05; one
sample t-test).  Error bars show ± SEM.  The lower panels depict the test protocols for the matching (left) and nonmatching (right) tasks in a T-maze.  The circles correspond to
food wells. 
the same direction on ≥5 out of the 6 trials (i. e. , ≥83%).  The percentage of learning sessions in which an animal displayed a side bias
was then compared between the two groups using a paired t-test. 
5. 2.  Results
5. 2. 1.  Histology
All of the 16 RSC3 rats displayed considerable cell loss in both the
granular and dysgranular subregions.  In one rat there was, however,
bilateral sparing of granular retrosplenial cortex rostral to the splenium. 
A further six animals had minimal sparing of granular A cortex caudal
to the splenium.  One of these six also had unilateral sparing in the most
rostral part of retrosplenial cortex.  Of the 16 RSC3 animals, nine had a
limited degree of bilateral hippocampal damage (Fig.  2).  The extent of
this damage varied across animals but was conﬁned within dorsal CA1
in all cases.  In ﬁve of these animals this bilateral damage aﬀected
mainly the medial edge of dorsal CA1, i. e. , distal CA1.  The remaining
four animals had even more restricted bilateral damage within the same
area.  As is sometimes seen following lesions in the retrosplenial cortex,
around half of the RSC3 group had ventricular dilatation.  In 10 of the
16 animals, there was some minor damage to anterior cingulate cortex
restricted to the border with retrosplenial cortex.  Following histological
analyses the ﬁnal group sizes were; RSC3 n = 16, Sham3, n = 12. 
5. 2. 2.  Behaviour
5. 2. 2. 1.  Error analysis.  The performance of RSC3 group was at chance
at Block 1 and 2 and from Block 4 to Block 8 (all p > 0. 05; one sample
t test; see Supplementary Table 2).  From Block 9 to Block 15 their
performance was above chance (all p < 0. 05; one sample t test; see
Supplementary Table 2).  Conversely, the performance of the Sham3
group was below chance for the ﬁrst two blocks (all p < 0. 05; one
sample t test; see Supplementary Table 2) and above chance from Block
8 to Block 15 (all p < 0. 05; one sample t test; see Supplementary
Table 2 and Fig.  8). 
When the percentage of correct matching trials was compared between the two groups using blocks of 12 trials there was no main eﬀect
of Group (F < 1; Fig.  8).  However, there was a signiﬁcant Group by
Block interaction (F6. 2161 = 3. 04, p = 0. 007).  Simple eﬀects revealed
that the RSC3 group made signiﬁcantly more correct responses during
the ﬁrst (F1,26 = 7. 14, p = 0. 01) and second (F1,26 = 7. 54, p = 0. 01)
blocks.  This pattern was
reversed in later blocks; at Block 8
(F1,26 = 4. 71, p = 0. 04) and Block 12 (F1,26 = 7. 75, p = 0. 01) the
Sham3 group made more correct responses than the RSC3 group.  By the
ﬁnal block (Block 15), the performance of both groups was comparable
(F < 1; Fig.  8). 
For the nonmatching stage, the performance of RSC3 group was
below chance for the ﬁrst two blocks (p < 0. 05; one sample t test).  For
the ﬁnal two blocks, their performance was above chance (p < 0. 05;
one sample t test).  The performance of the Sham3 group was also below
chance for the ﬁrst two blocks (p < 0. 05; one sample t test) and they
performed above chance for the ﬁnal three blocks (p < 0. 05; one
sample t test; Fig.  8).  There was no main eﬀect of Group (F < 1) or
Group by Block interaction (F7182 = 1. 1, p = 0. 36) on the percentage
of correct trials during the nonmatching task (Fig.  8). 
5. 2. 2. 2.  Perseveration vs.  learning phase.  Fig.  9A shows the percentage
of animals in each group that had reached the criterion for the learning
phase at each block (i. e. , when performance was at or above chance). 
For the matching task, the RSC3 group reached the learning phase
earlier on in training than did the Sham3 group.  For the nonmatchingA. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
For the nonmatching task there was no diﬀerence between the
groups in the fraction of errors made during either phase (F < 1).  Nor
was there an overall diﬀerence in the fraction of errors between the
learning and perseveration phase (F1,26 = 2. 02, p = 0. 17). 
5. 2. 2. 3.  Side Bias.  For the matching task, there was no diﬀerence
between the groups in the percentage of learning phase sessions in
which animals displayed a side bias (i. e.  ≥ 83% test trials in same
direction;nonmatching task, there was no diﬀerence between the groups in the
percentage of learning phase sessions in which animals displayed a side
bias (t26 = 1. 31, p = 0. 20; Fig.  9C). 
t26 = 1. 52,
p = 0. 14;
Fig.  8D). 
Similarly,5. 2. 3.  Impact of incidental hippocampal damage (Experiments 1–4)
Of the 16 RSC3 rats, nine had evidence of some bilateral hippocampal damage (see above).  Therefore, the lesion group was split according to whether there was bilateral hippocampal damage (subgroup
RSC3-BiHpc, n = 9) or not (subgroup RSC3-UniHpc, n = 7). 
A mixed ANOVA, with the between subjects factor Group (RSC3BiHpc and RSC3-UniHpc) and the within subject factor Block, was
conducted on the percentage of correct responses.  For the matching
task, there were no eﬀects of Group or interaction between Group and
Block (both F < 1).  Again, for the nonmatching task, there was no main
eﬀect of group (F < 1).  Curiously, a Group by Block interaction
(F7,98 = 2. 35, p = 0. 03) arose because the RSCBiHpc group made fewer
errors at block ﬁve than the RSC3-UniHpc group (simple eﬀects
F1,15 = 5. 4, p = 0. 04), i. e. , those rats with bilateral, additional damage
brieﬂy outperformed those with unilateral damage. 
<Conclusion> General discussion. 
There is both anatomical and functional evidence to suggest that the
rodent retrosplenial cortex might have an important role in supporting
frontal functions.  Anatomically, retrosplenial cortex is directly linked
with the anterior cingulate cortex and indirectly linked with prelimbic
cortex, via the thalamus and the anterior cingulate cortex [16,17,19]. 
Previous lesion studies have shown that, in addition to disrupting tests
of spatial memory [4,11,48], retrosplenial cortex lesions can impair
recency memory (Powell Name [22]), disrupt a rodent analogue of the
Stroop task [20], and impair crossmodal object recognition [26].  All of
these nonspatial tasks are closely associated with frontal cortex function
in rodents [21,23–25,27], pointing to joint functional contributions.  To
assess the likelihood that the rat retrosplenial cortex has a more general
role in supporting frontal functions, the present study employed three
tasks (Experiments 1, 2, 4) that are sensitive to prelimbic cortex lesions
(extradimensional shifts in a digging task, strategy shifting in an automated apparatus, and matching-to-place in a T-maze).  In addition,
both matching-to-place and cost-beneﬁt discrimination tasks (Experiment 3) are sensitive to anterior cingulate damage [33–35], as well as
intradimensional set learning [29]. 
Despite prior evidence that retrosplenial cortex might closely support frontal functions, there was no evidence for this prediction from
the present pattern of results.  Performance on the intradimensional/
extradimensional shift task (Experiment 1) and the cost-beneﬁt discrimination (Experiment 3) appeared unaﬀected by the surgeries.  The
only lesion eﬀect on the strategy-shifting task (Experiment 2) was
manifested as an enhanced rate of initial shifting from the visual to the
response-based task, i. e. , opposite to that associated with prelimbic
inactivation [30].  Finally, although the retrosplenial lesions aﬀected
performance on the matching-to-place task, again the pattern of errors
did not reﬂect that seen after prelimbic cortex lesions [35]. 
A possible concern is that the null results in Experiments 1–3 might
stem from retrosplenial tissue sparing.  This possibility seems, however,
unlikely.  As explained, two diﬀerent cohorts of rats with retrosplenial
cortex lesions, along with their sham controls, were tested in these
particular experiments.  In both cohorts, the retrosplenial surgeries
Fig.  9.  T-maze: matching and nonmatching (Experiment 4).  (A) The percentage of rats
reaching the learning phase (i. e. , ≥4 correct trials out of 12) at each block for the
matching (left panel) and nonmatching (right panel) tasks.  (B) The mean fraction of errors
made during the learning and perseveration phases for the matching and nonmatching
tasks.  Errors were normalised by the total number of trials in each phase.  (C) The mean
percentage of learning sessions in which animals displayed a side bias for the matching
and nonmatching tasks.  A side bias session was deﬁned as any session in which the rat
turned in the same direction on ≥5 out of the 6 trials (i. e. , ≥83%).  The side bias was only
calculated for those sessions in which all six of the trials were classiﬁed as learning trials;
sessions containing a mix of perseveration and learning trials were excluded.  Error bars
show ± SEM. 
task the reverse was true, with the Sham3 group reaching the learning
before the RSC3 group. 
The fraction of errors (see Methods) in each phase was compared
between the groups.  For the matching task, there was no overall difference in the fraction of errors between the learning and perseveration
phases (F1,26 = 3. 76, p = 0. 06; Fig.  9C).  There was, however, a signiﬁcant Group by Phase interaction (F1,26 = 5. 60, p = 0. 03), with the
RSC3 group making signiﬁcantly more learning phase errors than the
Sham3 group (F1,26 = 6. 10, p = 0. 