Theta Oscillations in the Human Medial Temporal
Lobe during Real-World Ambulatory MovementHighlights
d Movement-related 8 Hz theta oscillations occur in the human
medial temporal lobe
d Theta occurs in short bouts that are more prevalent during
fast versus slow movements
d The duration and prevalence of theta are higher in a
congenitally blind participant
d Combined motion capture and iEEG allow for future studies
of ambulatory behaviorZahra M.  Aghajan, Peter Schuette,
Tony A.  Fields, . . . , John Stern, Itzhak
Fried, Nanthia Suthana
Correspondence
nsuthana@mednet. ucla. edu
In Brief
Aghajan Name record deep brain activity,
during untethered freely moving
behavior, from participants chronically
implanted with depth electrodes.  They
demonstrate that 8 Hz theta oscillations,
the hallmark of spatial navigation in
rodents, also occur in humans, albeit in
shorter bouts that are more prevalent
during fast versus slow movements. 
M.  Aghajan Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3743–3751
December 18, 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 062
Current BiologyTheta Oscillations in the Human Medial Temporal
Lobe during Real-World Ambulatory Movement
Zahra M.  Aghajan,1 Peter Schuette,1 Tony A.  Fields,2 Michelle E.  Tran,3 Sameed M.  Siddiqui,1 Nicholas R.  Hasulak,4
Thomas K.  Tcheng,4 Dawn Eliashiv,2 Emily A.  Mankin,3 John Stern,2 Itzhak Fried,1,3,5,6 and Nanthia Suthana1,3,7,8,*
1Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
2Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
3Department of Neurosurgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
4NeuroPace, Inc. , Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
5Functional Neurosurgery Unit, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv 64361, Israel
6Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel
7Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
8Lead Contact
*Correspondence: nsuthana@mednet. ucla. edu
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 062The theta rhythm—a slow (6–12 Hz) oscillatory
component of the local ﬁeld potential—plays a critical role in spatial navigation and memory by coordinating the activity of neuronal ensembles within the
medial temporal
lobe (MTL).  Although theta has
been extensively studied in freely moving rodents,
its presence in humans has been elusive and primarily investigated in stationary subjects.  Here we used
a unique clinical opportunity to examine theta within
the human MTL during untethered,
real-world
ambulatory movement.  We recorded intracranial
electroencephalographic activity from participants
chronically implanted with the wireless NeuroPace
responsive neurostimulator (RNS) and tracked their
motion with sub-millimeter precision.  Our data revealed that movement-related theta oscillations
indeed exist in humans, such that theta power is
signiﬁcantly higher during movement than immobility.  Unlike in rodents, however, theta occurs in
short bouts, with average durations of 400 ms,
which are more prevalent during fast versus slow
movements.  In a rare opportunity to study a congenitally blind participant, we found that both the prevalence and duration of theta bouts were increased
relative to the sighted participants.  These results
provide critical support for conserved neurobiological characteristics of theta oscillations during ambulatory spatial navigation, while highlighting some
fundamental differences across species in these
oscillations between humans and rodents. 
INTRODUCTION
The crucial role of the medial temporal lobe (MTL) in declarative
memory and encoding new experiences is unequivocal based on
an abundant body of literature in humans and many mammalian
species [1–3].  It is posited that the ongoing rhythmic oscillatory
activity in the local ﬁeld potential (LFP) is critical for the temporal
organization of neural assemblies in this region, allowing
appropriate modiﬁcation of synaptic connections.  Additionally,
various frequency bands are thought to be involved in different
brain functions [4, 5]. 
In particular, the 6–12 Hz frequency
range—commonly referred to as the theta rhythm—has been
associated with exploratory behavior [6, 7] and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep [8], and different features of this rhythm have
been linked to memory performance on various tasks [9–13]. 
In the rodent hippocampus, theta oscillations (6–12 Hz) are
most prominent during locomotion, even during tasks with no
memory demand, such as running on linear tracks and random
foraging, although a lower frequency theta (3–7 Hz) has been
reported during periods of immobility [14].  Theta has also been
reported in other species, such as cats [15], and in shorter oscillatory bouts in bats [16, 17], non-human primates [18, 19], and
humans [20–22].  There is, thus, an apparent discrepancy in the
presence of persistent movement-related theta across species. 
This issue is confounded by the fact that—due to restrictions
imposed by recording techniques—electrophysiological recordings in primates, contrary to those performed in rodents, have
typically employed virtual navigation in stationary subjects. 
Recent rodent hippocampal recordings during virtual navigation
have demonstrated signiﬁcant differences in theta dynamics
between virtual and real-world navigation, including lower frequencies and a lack of frequency-speed dependence in virtual
navigation [23, 24].  In light of these studies, resolving whether
persistent movement-related theta could be a feature of human
navigation requires directly probing the intracranial electroencephalogram (iEEG) during natural voluntary human movement. 
Movement-related theta was observed in walking humans in one
recent study [22].  However, due to lack of motion tracking, this
study did not allow for characterization of theta with respect to
movement parameters [22].  We therefore conducted an experiment to elucidate the properties of theta oscillations in the MTL
of freely moving humans.  This was made possible by using a
novel chronic implant that allowed for wireless iEEG recording
outside of a restrictive hospital setting. 
Current Biology 27, 3743–3751, December 18, 2017 Published by Elsevier Ltd.  3743
Figure 1.  Simultaneous Motion Tracking
and iEEG Recording within the Human MTL
(A) Example post-operative CT of a participant with
an implanted electrode in the right hippocampus
(top left) along with a coronal view of a high-resolution MRI overlaid with co-registered electrodes
(shown in yellow). 
(B) Sample trajectory of a participant during one
complete trial consisting of
linear and circular
movements. 
(C) Schematic of the setup of cameras used for
motion capture (see the STAR Methods).  Inset:
real-time motion tracking of an example participant is shown. 
(D) Movement speed distribution of all sighted
participants (green; median, [25th, 75th] = 0. 87,
[0. 20, 1. 14] m/s, Ntrials = 21) and one congenitally
blind participant (black; median, [25th, 75th] = 0. 44,
[0. 05, 0. 68] m/s, Ntrials = 7).  Dashed vertical lines
indicate median value; shaded areas correspond
to kernel smoothing function estimates of the distributions. 
See also Tables S1 and S2 and Movie S1. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
MTL Recordings in Freely Walking Humans Implanted
with the RNS System
Participants were four neurosurgical patients (one congenitally
blind), chronically implanted with the FDA-approved NeuroPace
RNS System (responsive neurostimulator) (Figure 1A) for treatment of pharmacologically intractable epilepsy.  For participant
demographics, see Tables S1 and S2.  For studying ambulatory
movement, the RNS System provides two signiﬁcant advantages over traditional recording techniques in the hospital
setting: motion and muscle artifacts are entirely eliminated (since
the implant is fully shielded); subjects are able to freely move
around without the limitations imposed by restrictive hospital
equipment, related safety protocols, and tethered implanted
wires connected to large recording equipment.  The RNS System
recorded continuous bipolar iEEG activity from two adjacent
electrode contacts (sampling rate: 250 Hz, with an analog ﬁlter
equivalent to a ﬁrst-order Butterworth with 3 dB attenuation at
the cutoff frequencies (4–90 Hz); for a detailed description, see
the STAR Methods).  Participants with MTL electrodes performed
a task in which they were instructed to walk along linear and circular paths at slow and fast speeds.  A complete trial consisted of
the following four movements: (1) slow movement in straight
lines, (2) slow movement in circles, (3) fast movement in straight
lines, and (4) fast movements in circles; the order of these instructions was randomized (Figure 1B; see the STAR Methods). 
Within each trial, after the participants ﬁnished one type of movement, they were temporarily immobile until a pre-recorded voice
command informed them to begin the next type of motion. 
Motion tracking was performed using the OptiTrack system
(Natural Point), which was capable of recording participants’ positional and rotational information (Figures 1C and 1D; Movie S1). 
Position information was recorded simultaneously with iEEG
3744 Current Biology 27, 3743–3751, December 18, 2017
data (Figure 2A; Movies S2 and S3; see the STAR Methods). 
The locations of electrodes were determined by co-registration
of high-resolution post-operative computed tomography (CT)
images with high-resolution pre-operative magnetic resonance
images that had been subjected to automated segmentation of
MTL subregions to facilitate visualization (Figure 2B; Table S3;
see the STAR Methods).  Although the RNS System is implanted
in potential seizure onset zones, pairs of electrode contacts
frequently span up to 10 mm of tissue, thereby leading to
some recordings in healthy tissue.  In the current study, each
participant had at least one contact ipsilateral to the seizure
onset zone (Table S3).  To further account for epileptic tissue in
all contact recordings, we eliminated epochs with putative
epileptic activity by using a thresholding algorithm, similar to
methods previously described [25] (see the STAR Methods and
Figure S1A), and visual inspection, which resulted in discarding
3% of the data per trial (median, [25th, 75th] = 3. 04%, [1. 32%,
4. 62%], Nparticipants = 4, Ntrials 3 channels = 112; Figure S1B). 
Note that the responsive therapy (stimulation feature) was turned
off during the experiments and, hence, there was no stimulation
artifact in the data (see the STAR Methods). 
Theta Oscillations during Movement and ImmobilityExamination of raw iEEG traces revealed striking theta oscillations, which were readily visible (Figure 2A; Movies S2 and S3). 
We ﬁrst sought to examine whether these theta oscillations
were more prominent during movement than immobility and
would thus be considered an analog of movement-related theta
in rodents.  To address this, in each trial a multi-taper power
spectrum was calculated within each condition, i. e. , movement
versus immobility, deﬁned as speeds below 10 cm/s.  We found
that theta power was indeed higher during movement, as shown
in individual examples (Figure 3A; Figure S2).  The theta power
Figure 2.  Example Theta Oscillations in the Human MTL
(A) Example 1-s-long raw iEEG traces (gray) from the MTL of all study participants overlaid with ﬁltered (3–12 Hz) theta oscillations (hippocampal and entorhinal
theta shown in red and blue, respectively).  Participant P3 is congenitally blind.  Note that, on average, the duration of theta bouts is shorter than 1 s, as
demonstrated in this ﬁgure (for a detailed characterization, see Figure 4). 
(B) (Left) Sample electrode locations from a participant (P2) overlaid onto coronal pre-operative high-resolution MRI.  (Right) Automated MTL subregion
segmentation (note that different colors correspond to different areas) demonstrating electrode locations in an example participant.  White areas correspond to
white matter. 
See also Figures S1 and S6, Table S3, and Movies S2 and S3. 
index, a normalized measure of power difference between the
two conditions, was signiﬁcantly positive for all participants
(Figure 3B; see the STAR Methods) and on the population level(median, [25th, 75th] = 0. 40, [0. 30, 0. 51]; p = 4. 56 3 10
Wilcoxon signed-rank test; n = 112).  This analysis assumes
that individual data points are statistically independent and
cannot account for potential clustering of the data due to the
within-subject
repeated-measures design.  To address this,
since neighboring electrode contacts and repeated trials from
the participant do not constitute independent samples, we
used generalized estimating equations (GEEs) [26, 27] to model
relative theta power as a function of whether the participant was
moving or not (see the STAR Methods).  In agreement with the
results obtained from the theta power index distribution, we
found that movement is indeed a signiﬁcant factor in predicting
relative theta power (p < 0. 001, Wald c2 = 172. 50; estimated
means and 95% Wald conﬁdence intervals are as follows:for
immobility). 
for movement and 0. 30,
[0. 67, 0. 73]
[0. 27, 0. 33]
Prevalence of Theta Oscillations
To further investigate how movement speed modulated theta,
we quantiﬁed the prevalence of signiﬁcant theta oscillations during fast versus slow movements using the better oscillation
detection (BOSC) method [28–30].  This method uses wavelets
to provide a power estimate for the signal, and—accounting
for the background 1/f dependency—it can detect periods with
signiﬁcant oscillations at different
frequencies that exceed
thresholds for power and duration (see the STAR Methods). 
This method was recently used by Watrous Name [31]comparative study of theta oscillations between virtual navigation studies in humans and real-world navigation studies in rodents.  Therefore, applying the BOSC method allowed for direct
comparisons of our ﬁndings with previously published results. 
For each participant and within each trial, data were separated
into low- and high-speed movements using a median split on
speed in that trial to obtain an equal amount of data within
each condition (see the STAR Methods).  By utilizing the BOSC
method [28, 29], episodes with signiﬁcant oscillations between
3 and 30 Hz (p-episodes, percentage trial time in oscillatory
episodes [29]; occurring for at least 3 cycles and above 95%
chance level; Figure 4A) were calculated in frequency windows
of 0. 25 Hz (see the STAR Methods).  We found that, in all 4 participants, there was a signiﬁcant increase in theta oscillations
during fast movements compared to slow movements
(Figure 4B).  This increase in the prevalence of
theta, as
quantiﬁed by p-episodes, was observed between 7 and
9. 25 Hz (Ntrials 3 channels = 84; p < 0. 05, clustered-based permutation test [32]; see the STAR Methods) for the sighted participants and between 6. 5 and 8. 75 Hz in the congenitally blind
Current Biology 27, 3743–3751, December 18, 2017 3745
Figure 3.  Theta Power during Movement versus Periods of Immobility
(A) Example (normalized) power spectra from a sighted participant (P1, top, green) and the congenitally blind participant (P3, bottom, black) displaying more theta
power during movement (solid lines) compared to immobility (dashed lines).  The power spectrum for each trial was normalized by the average power in that trial,
during movement and immobility, over the frequency range 3–12 Hz.  Values below 4 Hz (lower range of the analog bandpass ﬁlter) are marked with shaded gray
areas.  Channel names are labeled clinically, and for a detailed description, see Table S3.  The recordings were bipolar using adjacent electrodes 1-2 and 3-4 (e. g. ,
REC1-REC2 is one iEEG channel).  The two adjacent electrodes in iEEG channel REC1-REC2 in participant P1 were located in the right entorhinal cortex (REC1)
and right perirhinal cortex (REC2).  The two adjacent electrodes in iEEG channel LEC1-LEC2 in participant P3 were located in the left entorhinal cortex (LEC1) and
left perirhinal cortex (LEC2). 
(B) Theta power index was signiﬁcantly positive for all participants as shown above, thus indicating higher theta power during movement (sighted participants,
 7; congenitally blind participant, black;
green; P1: 0. 50, [0. 43, 0. 57], p = 3. 79 3 10
 6; Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used because not all of the distributions passed the Lilliefors test of normality).  Shaded area
P3: 0. 45, [0. 35, 0. 50], p = 3. 79 3 10
corresponds to kernel smoothing function estimate of the distribution and the dashed line indicates the median value. 
See also Figure S2 and Table S3. 
 16; P2: 0. 29, [0. 27, 0. 36], p = 8. 86 3 10
 5; P5: 0. 39, [0. 24, 0. 43], p = 2. 36 3 10
participant (Ntrials 3 channels = 28; p < 0. 05, clustered-based permutation test; note that these ranges were qualitatively similar
using Wilcoxon rank-sum test).  Interestingly, these theta episodes were transient and present 10% of the time for the
sighted group, while this percentage was 30% in the congenitally blind participant (Figure 4B).  Hence, we analyzed the data
from the congenitally blind participant separately from the data
from sighted participants, whose results were qualitatively
similar to each other (Figure S3A).  Moreover, we observed
signiﬁcant differences in p-episodes in higher
frequencies
(17. 25–18. 25 Hz in sighted participants and 14. 5–16. 75 Hz in
the congenitally blind participant; clustered-based permutation
test) (Figure 4B).  This might suggest the presence of theta harmonics in our data, which have been reported to increase with
movement speed in rats [33]. 
The differences in the prevalence of theta oscillations between
the blind and sighted participants called for an assessment of
sighted participants walking with their eyes closed.  To address
this, two of our participants (P1 and P5) performed the task while
they were blindfolded and had their eyes closed.  Although the
overall speed was generally lower (median, [25th, 75th] = 0. 28,
[0. 02, 0. 60] m/s), we found no qualitative differences in theta
properties between the conditions with closed or open eyes
(Figure S3B).  This suggests that the congenitally blind participant
may have developed a different strategy for navigating an environment that may not be readily available to sighted participants. 
We then asked whether there was a strategy that would result in
higher prevalence of theta oscillations.  To address this, we
asked a participant (P5) to walk back and forth on the same
path while head-scanning left and right or looking at a ﬁxed
target on the wall.  Here, we found that theta oscillations were
more present during head-scanning behavior, quantiﬁed by
larger angular speed of
the participant’s head (Figure 5;
p-episode = 21. 73% ± 4. 47% at peak frequency of 7. 75 Hz
versus p-episode = 10. 09% ± 3. 85% during walking while looking at a ﬁxed target). 
It is worth noting that there is an analog ﬁlter on the RNS
to a ﬁrst-order Butterworth with 3 dB
System, equivalent
3746 Current Biology 27, 3743–3751, December 18, 2017
Figure 4.  Signiﬁcant Increase in the Prevalence of High-Frequency Theta Oscillations during Fast Compared to Slow Movement
(A) Color map shows percentage of time with signiﬁcant oscillations (p-episode) in the frequency range indicated on the x axis averaged across trials for each
clinically labeled channel in the left entorhinal cortex (LEC) and right entorhinal cortex (REC) and left hippocampus (LHIP) and right hippocampus (RHIP) from all
participants (electrode 1, most distal; electrode 4, most proximal).  The electrodes were implanted orthogonally to the surface of the brain; thus, distal and
proximal correspond to deeper and shallower contacts, respectively).  Channel names are labeled clinically; for a detailed description of the localizations, see
Table S3.  Data are normalized by the maximum value for each channel, within each condition, for visibility purposes (range: 0–1).  Brighter colors indicate larger
values as demonstrated by the colorbars.  Throughout this ﬁgure, red shades and blue shades correspond to fast and slow movements, respectively.  Also, note
that, for each participant, channels are sorted based on the frequency with maximum prevalence during fast movements, i. e. , the frequency with maximum
p-episodes in each channel increases from top to bottom rows.  Left: shown are the normalized p-episodes during fast movement (Ntrials for participants P1, P2,
P5, and P3 (congenitally blind) were 7, 5, 9, and 7, respectively).  Right: shown are the same as at left but during movement at slow speeds. 
(B) Percentage of time with signiﬁcant oscillations (across all trials and channels; shown are mean ± SEM) during fast movements (red) versus slow movements
(blue) in 3 sighted participants (top, Ntrials 3 channels = 84) and 1 congenitally blind participant (bottom, Ntrials 3 channels = 28).  Black horizontal lines indicate regions
with signiﬁcant difference in p-episodes between fast and slow movement conditions (p < 0. 05, clustered-based permutation test).  Values below 4 Hz (lower
range of the analog bandpass ﬁlter) are marked with shaded gray areas. 
See also Figures S3–S5 and Table S3. 
attenuation at the cutoff frequencies (4–90 Hz).  Thus, it was
necessary to test and validate our results to ensure that they
were not an artifact of the ﬁlter.  First, we used broadband data
(0. 1–8,000 Hz) recorded from an independent group of participants (n = 2), from a previous study by Suthana Name [34], who
were acutely implanted with depth electrodes for seizure monitoring during inpatient hospitalization (hereinafter referred to as
depth subjects).  Here, we conﬁrmed that the BOSC method
returned highly similar results, both in calculating power spectra
and oscillation detection patterns, in the presence or absence of
a mathematically implemented ﬁlter analogous to the one on the
RNS System (Figures S4A and S4B; see the STAR Methods). 
Second, to further ensure that our results were not skewed by
the analog ﬁlter on the RNS Ssystem, we collected broadband
data (0. 1–8,000 Hz) recorded from a single depth subject during
movement.  The participant was asked to walk slowly around his
hospital room as we tracked his motion using Google’s Project
Tango tablet (see the STAR Methods), which allowed us to
perform the same analyses we used in participants with the
RNS System (Figure S4C).  We used data from an electrode contact (macro-electrode; see the STAR Methods) that fell within the
MTL region (CA1) for further analysis.  Due to the small variability
in the walking speed, caused by the participant having to
navigate in limited space around hospital equipment while
tethered, we compared p-episodes using the BOSC method
during periods of movement versus immobility.  Here, too, our
results showed a qualitatively similar percentage of time with
signiﬁcant
theta oscillation during movement, and they
Current Biology 27, 3743–3751, December 18, 2017 3747
Figure 5.  Theta Oscillations Are More Prevalent during Head-Scanning Behavior
(A) Example raw iEEG trace (gray) from a participant (P5) overlaid with ﬁltered (3–12 Hz) theta oscillations (blue) while he walked down the same path with and
without head-scanning left and right.  Green trace demonstrates the angular velocity of the head. 
(B) The participant was able to perform the task, and periods with head-scanning behavior (red) manifested higher head angular speed (dashed line denotes the
median value). 
(C) Head-scanning behavior resulted in higher presence of theta oscillations (red curve, p-episode = 21. 73% ± 4. 47% at peak frequency of 7. 75 Hz) compared to
periods when the participant walked looking at a ﬁxed target (blue curve, p-episode = 10. 09% ± 3. 85% at 7. 75 Hz).  Shown are the mean ± SEM values. 
Values below 4 Hz (lower range of the analog bandpass ﬁlter) are marked with shaded gray areas. 
demonstrated that higher frequency theta is more prevalent during movement versus immobility (Figure S4D), thus indicating
that our oscillation detection method is robust. 
Duration of Oscillatory Bouts
We next asked whether the increase in the prevalence of theta
during fast versus slow movements was due to longer theta
bouts or higher rates of occurrence.  To address this, we
computed the duration of oscillatory bouts by varying the
threshold for the number of cycles required for signiﬁcance (Figure 6A).  We detected signiﬁcant oscillatory episodes with at least
one cycle, converted the total number of detected cycles in each
bout to durations, and computed the average durations of these
epochs in each frequency bin.  Comparisons of the durations of
theta bouts in fast and slow movements showed no signiﬁcant
difference in bout durations between the two conditions (p >
0. 05 at any frequency, cluster-based permutation test) (Figure 6B).  This suggests that more prevalent theta during fast
movement potentially arises as a result of short theta bouts of
similar lengths occurring more frequently during fast movements.  We also observed that the average duration of theta
bouts was higher
in the congenitally blind participant
(570 ms) compared to sighted participants (440 ms) at the
peak frequency (Figure 6B).  It is worth mentioning that, by
comparing our results with those published by Watrous Name
[31] using the same method (see Figure 2D in [31]), it is evident
that our results from the blind participant are more similar to
those observed in moving rodents.  Moreover, our ﬁndings in
sighted participants lie between rodent real-world navigation
and human virtual navigation, further supporting the hypothesis
that the observed theta oscillations in the current study are
indeed movement related. 
To test whether the movement speed (i. e. , fast versus slow
movement) can be decoded from the pattern of oscillations,
we used a neural network machine-learning model, a commonly
used method for classiﬁcation that is generally more ﬂexible
compared to other methods, such as logistic regression [35]
(see the STAR Methods).  Here, power spectra—computed using
3748 Current Biology 27, 3743–3751, December 18, 2017
wavelet analysis present in the BOSC method toolbox (Figure S5A; see the STAR Methods)—were used as the input to
our model in order to predict movement speed (Figure S5B). 
Data were divided into independent sets for training, crossvalidation (to reduce overﬁtting), and testing.  Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) plots and the area under these curves
(AUC)—common measures of model performance in classiﬁcation [36]—showed that the performance of our model was
signiﬁcantly better than chance in classifying fast from slow
movement speeds (Figure S5C). 
<Conclusion> DISCUSSION. 
We present a novel,
innovative methodology for combining
motion capture technology and continuous iEEG recordings,
enabling access to the MTL in freely moving humans.  To our
knowledge, this study demonstrates the ﬁrst quantiﬁcation of
theta oscillations during untethered ambulatory movement in
humans.  Our results show that high-frequency (8 Hz) theta oscillations occur during movement and exhibit a higher power
compared to periods of immobility.  In addition, theta occurs in
short bouts (400 ms) that are present more frequently during
fast versus slow movement speeds and, thus, signiﬁcantly differentiate the two. 
Previous investigations of theta oscillations in primates have
resulted in conﬂicting evidence regarding the presence and
functionality of the theta rhythm compared to those in rodents
[19, 31, 37, 38].  These dissimilarities are thought to be, in part,
attributed to the differences in the primary source of sensory information in these species—visual
inputs in primates versus
olfactory and somatosensory inputs in rodents.  Nonetheless,
the lack of feasibility in recording iEEG in freely moving primates
(in contrast to rodents) has not previously allowed for unequivocal evaluation of
theta oscillatory properties under similar
conditions in these species.  Our ﬁndings demonstrate that, in
humans, short, intermittent theta bouts occur and are indeed
movement-related, but they are not as continuous as those
found in rodents.  Further, these bouts occur at a higher rate
Figure 6.  Duration of Theta Bouts Is Similar during Fast and Slow Movements
(A) Color maps indicate percentage of time with signiﬁcant oscillations (p-episodes) in each frequency (averaged across trials, channels, and participants),
assuming varying number of minimum cycles for detection (y axis).  Red and blue color schemes correspond to fast and slow movements, respectively, here and
throughout the ﬁgure.  Number at the top right corner indicates range. 
(B) Duration of signiﬁcant oscillations at each frequency is shown as mean ± SEM across all trials and channels.  There was no signiﬁcant difference between the
duration of the bouts between fast (red) and slow (blue) movements.  However, note that, in the congenitally blind participant (right), the duration of theta bouts
(0. 57 s at peak frequency of 7. 75 Hz) was longer than those in the sighted participants (left, 0. 44 s at peak frequency of 7. 25 Hz).  Values below 4 Hz (lower range of
the analog bandpass ﬁlter) are marked with shaded gray areas. 
during fast movements.  One possible explanation for this effect
is that saccadic eye movements are the dominant source of sensory input as a means for exploration in primates [16, 19, 38]. 
Thus, if saccadic eye movements occur at a higher rate during
faster locomotion, this could potentially lead to more frequent
theta bouts.  Whether theta bouts are elicited and phase-reset
by saccades warrants further investigation. 
Curiously, in our present results, signiﬁcant theta oscillations
occurred more often and more continuously in a single participant who is congenitally blind.  This participant used a Hoover
cane to traverse the environment, thereby possibly using somatosensory and path-integration inputs to a greater extent
compared to other normally sighted participants.  This may support the idea that the modality of sensory processing may be a
critical factor relating theta oscillations to movement.  Alternatively, it is argued that theta oscillations facilitate multisensory
integration during active explorations and, thus, the differences
between the blind participant and the sighted participants could
have arisen as a result of how often exploration is required for
navigation [16, 38].  Given that somatosensory and path-integration cues—used by the blind participant and even rats—are
more local compared to the distal visual cues (used by the
sighted participants), they might be engaged more frequently
during navigation.  This might elucidate why theta in sighted humans is less continuous than theta in the blind participant and in
rats, and also it might explain why theta oscillations are present
more often during fast movements compared to slow movements, and during head-scanning behavior. 
the frequency of
While, on average, the prevalence of theta oscillations was
higher during fast versus slow movement, we observed differences in oscillation frequencies across regions and within
individuals (Figure 4A).  Thus, it is possible that there are subtle
differences in oscillatory properties across MTL regions, which
are not captured within our study.  For example, in rodents, it
has been shown that
theta oscillations
decreases—albeit slightly—along the septotemporal axis of
the hippocampus, and a similar decrease has been found in
the dorsoventral axis of the entorhinal cortex [39–41].  Another
recent study demonstrated that nonlinear dynamics of theta
oscillations in rodents vary with movement speed and are
modulated by hippocampal regions [33].  Lastly, theta oscillations are diminished in power and spatial selectivity is
reduced in the ventral compared to dorsal hippocampus [40]. 
In humans, the dorsoventral distinction is thought to map onto
Current Biology 27, 3743–3751, December 18, 2017 3749
the posterior-anterior hippocampal axis [42].  Therefore, future
larger sample studies will be necessary to characterize
movement-related theta changes across MTL regions and the
implications of these differences in the coordinating role of theta
oscillations. 
Recently, it has been argued that the human analog of rodent
theta oscillations exists in the lower (<4 Hz) frequency range [37]. 
However, to our knowledge, the investigation of theta oscillations within the human MTL during real-world ambulatory
movement has been limited due to the restrictions of wired intracranial recording electrode technology and the electrical noise
introduced in the recordings as a result of physical movement. 
Using wireless, chronically implanted electrodes, our results
suggest there does, in fact, exist a higher frequency (8 Hz)
theta oscillation in the human MTL associated with physical
movement—a ﬁnding that was replicated in an independent
study [22].  Furthermore, lower frequency theta (4 Hz) in humans has been observed in stationary virtual navigation and
memory tasks [43–46].  However, due to the analog ﬁlter on the
RNS System, the current study cannot address the differences
between the two types of theta oscillations, and future studies
are needed to determine how low- and high-frequency theta
dynamics interact during ambulatory movement compared to
those in stationary behavioral tasks.  While the high-frequency
theta presented in the current study varies signiﬁcantly between
different speeds of movement, its exact behavioral correlates
remain to be examined.  It must be borne in mind that the study
participants were epilepsy patients with altered cognitive functions.  Although the task employed in this study was not related
to memory and, consequently, all participants successfully performed the task, the relationship between theta oscillations and
memory performance warrants further investigation in future experiments with memory demands. 
Overall, the current study provides important insight into
human MTL theta oscillations during ambulatory behavior, and,
by elucidating similarities as well as differences in theta dynamics, it can bridge ﬁndings across species.  We present a
novel paradigm for the leveraging of FDA-approved technology
combined with motion tracking that allows for future investigation of neural oscillatory dynamics during real-world behaviors
in humans. 
STAR+METHODS
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Elimination of epileptic activity from iEEG
B Theta power index
B Generalized estimating equations (GEE)
B Detection of signiﬁcant oscillations
B Control analysis for oscillation detection
B Extraction of theta from iEEG
B Statistics
B Classiﬁcation of movement speed using machine
learning
d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes six ﬁgures, three tables, and three movies
and can be found with this article online at https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Z. M. A. , I. F. , and N. S.  conceived the research.  Z. M. A.  and N. S.  designed the
research.  Z. M. A. , P. S. , M. E. T. , S. M. S. , and N. S.  performed analyses. 
Z. M. A. , P. S. , E. A. M. , and N. S.  collected data and performed research. 
Z. M. A. , T. A. F. , N. R. H. , T. K. T. , and N. S.  designed and implemented technical
tools.  D. E.  and J. S.  provided clinical procedures.  I. F.  performed all implantation of the RNS and depth electrodes.  Z. M. A. , E. A. M. , I. F. , and N. S.  wrote
the paper.  All the authors commented on the manuscript. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by UCLA startup funds (principal
investigator:
N. S. ) and grants from the DARPA Restoring Active Memory program
(N66001-14-2-4029; principal
Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NS058280 to Z. M. A and E. A. M. , and
NS084017 to I. F. ), and the A. P.  Giannini Foundation to E. A. M.  We thank Eric
Behnke for technical assistance, Brooke Salaz for general assistance, Fabien
Scalzo for useful discussions, and the participants for volunteering for this
study.  T. K. T.  and N. R. H.  are employees of NeuroPace, Inc. 
the National
investigator:Received: July 10, 2017
Revised: September 21, 2017
Accepted: October 25, 2017
Published: November 30, 2017
REFERENCES
1.  Squire, L. R.  (1992).  Memory and the hippocampus: a synthesis from ﬁndings with rats, monkeys, and humans.  Psychol.  Rev.  99, 195–231. 
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
2.  Squire, L. R. , Stark, C. E. L. , and Clark, R. E.  (2004).  The medial temporal
lobe.  Annu.  Rev.  Neurosci.  27, 279–306. 
d KEY RESOURCE TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Participants implanted with the RNS System
B Depth subjects
d METHOD DETAILS
B Data acquisition
B Electromagnet
B Motion tracking
B Synchronization of iEEG and motion capture data
B Electrode Localization
B Behavioral task
3750 Current Biology 27, 3743–3751, December 18, 2017
3.  Buzsa´ ki, G. , and Moser, E. I.  (2013).  Memory, navigation and theta rhythm
in the hippocampal-entorhinal system.  Nat.  Neurosci.  16, 130–138. 
4.  Jutras, M. J. , and Buffalo, E. A.  (2014).  Oscillatory correlates of memory in
non-human primates.  Neuroimage 85, 694–701. 
5.  Colgin, L. L.  (2016).  Rhythms of the hippocampal network.  Nat.  Rev. 
Neurosci.  17, 239–249. 
6.  Buzsaki, G.  (2006).  Rhythms of the Brain (Oxford University Press). 
7.  Vanderwolf, C. H.  (1969).  Hippocampal electrical activity and voluntary
in the rat.  Electroencephalogr.  Clin.  Neurophysiol.  26,
movement
407–418. 
8.  Robinson, T. E. , Kramis, R. C. , and Vanderwolf, C. H.  (1977).  Two types of
cerebral activation during active sleep: relations to behavior.  Brain Res. 
124, 544–549. 
9.  Berry, S. D. , and Thompson, R. F.  (1978).  Prediction of learning rate from
the hippocampal electroencephalogram.  Science 200, 1298–1300. 
10.  Klimesch, W. , Doppelmayr, M. , Russegger, H. , and Pachinger, T.  (1996). 
Theta band power in the human scalp EEG and the encoding of new information.  Neuroreport 7, 1235–1240. 
11.  Seager, M. A. , Johnson, L. D. , Chabot, E. S. , Asaka, Y. , and Berry, S. D. 
Impact of hippocampal
(2002).  Oscillatory brain states and learning:
theta-contingent training.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 99, 1616–1620. 
30.  Whitten, T. A. , Hughes, A. M. , Dickson, C. T. , and Caplan, J. B.  (2011).  A better oscillation detection method robustly extracts EEG rhythms across
brain state changes:
the human alpha rhythm as a test case. 
Neuroimage 54, 860–874. 
31.  Watrous, A. J. , Lee, D. J. ,
Izadi, A. , Gurkoff, G. G. , Shahlaie, K. , and
Ekstrom, A. D.  (2013).  A comparative study of human and rat hippocampal
low-frequency oscillations during spatial navigation.  Hippocampus 23,
656–661. 
12.  Winson, J.  (1978).  Loss of hippocampal theta rhythm results in spatial
32.  Maris, E. , and Oostenveld, R.  (2007).  Nonparametric statistical testing of
memory deﬁcit in the rat.  Science 201, 160–163. 
EEG- and MEG-data.  J.  Neurosci.  Methods 164, 177–190. 
13.  Canolty, R. T. , and Knight, R. T.  (2010).  The functional role of crossfrequency coupling.  Trends Cogn.  Sci.  14, 506–515. 
33.  Sheremet, A. , Burke, S. N. , and Maurer, A. P.  (2016).  Movement Enhances
the Nonlinearity of Hippocampal Theta.  J.  Neurosci.  36, 4218–4230. 
14.  Hasselmo, M. E. 
(2005).  Whatrhythm?–Linking behavioral data to phasic properties of ﬁeld potential
and unit recording data.  Hippocampus 15, 936–949. 
is the function of hippocampal
15.  Bland, B. H. , Sainsbury, R. S. , and Creery, B. L.  (1979).  Anatomical correlates of rhythmical slow wave activity (theta) in the hippocampal formation
of the cat.  Brain Res.  161, 199–209. 
16.  Ulanovsky, N. , and Moss, C. F.  (2007).  Hippocampal cellular and network
activity in freely moving echolocating bats.  Nat.  Neurosci.  10, 224–233. 
17.  Yartsev, M. M. , and Ulanovsky, N.  (2013).  Representation of three-dimensional space in the hippocampus of ﬂying bats.  Science 340, 367–372. 
18.  Stewart, M. , and Fox, S. E.  (1991).  Hippocampal theta activity in monkeys. 
Brain Res.  538, 59–63. 
19.  Jutras, M. J. , Fries, P. , and Buffalo, E. A.  (2013).  Oscillatory activity in the
monkey hippocampus during visual exploration and memory formation. 
Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 110, 13144–13149. 
20.  Lega, B. C. , Jacobs, J. , and Kahana, M.  (2012).  Human hippocampal theta
oscillations and the formation of episodic memories.  Hippocampus 22,
748–761. 
21.  Ekstrom, A. D. , Caplan, J. B. , Ho, E. , Shattuck, K. , Fried, I. , and Kahana,
M. J.  (2005).  Human hippocampal theta activity during virtual navigation. 
Hippocampus 15, 881–889. 
22.  Bohbot, V. D. , Copara, M. S. , Gotman, J. , and Ekstrom, A. D.  (2017).  Lowfrequency theta oscillations in the human hippocampus during real-world
and virtual navigation.  Nat. 