
Operant behavior results from the relations between behavior and
its consequences and has been used extensively as a model of voluntary
behavior [1,2].  The systematic analysis of environmental and biological
factors underlying operant behavior provides understanding and potential treatments for a range of behaviors considered maladaptive,
such as addictions [3] and overeating [4].  Most research examining
biological and environmental factors in learning processes come from
studies with mammalian laboratory animals.  As an alternative, zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) are ideal for examining environmental and biological
factors involved in learning because of their high fecundity, low-cost
maintenance,
transparent embryo, and fully sequenced genome
[e. g. ,5–8].  Key neurobiological structures mediating the reinforcing
eﬀects of
(e. g. , drugs) appear conserved in zebraﬁsh
[e. g. ,9,10].  Moreover, many diﬀerent types of genetically modiﬁedzebraﬁsh are available (e. g. , National BioResource Project in Japan). 
These features oﬀer biomedical and behavioral researchers opportunities to examine how genes and environment interact to determine
operant behavior.  Nevertheless, studies of operant behavior with zebraﬁsh remain few [11–13]. 
One area of research relevant to understanding operant behavior
generally, and treatments for maladaptive behavior speciﬁcally, is with
laboratory models of relapse.  A persistent tendency to relapse even after
prolonged periods of abstinence is a deﬁning feature of addictive behavior [14].  Therefore, relapse of previously learned behavior has been
investigated extensively during the past few decades [15–18].  Most
models of relapse arrange reinforcement of operant responding in Phase
1 to simulate engaging in maladaptive behavior and then, in Phase 2,
model a basic form of behavioral treatment by eliminating those reinforcers through extinction of operant responding.  Models of relapse
primarily diﬀer in Phase 3 as a result of arranging diﬀerent factors
⁎ Corresponding author at: Aichi Bunkyo University, Faculty of Humanities, 5969-3 Okusa, Komaki, Aichi, 485-8565 Japan. 
E-mail addresses: toshikazu. kuroda@gmail. com (T.  Kuroda), yuto. mizutani3@gmail. com (Y.  Mizutani), carlos. cancado@gmail. com (C. R. X.  Cançado),
cpodlesnik@ﬁt. edu (C. A.  Podlesnik). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 023
Received 25 July 2017; Received in revised form 3 August 2017; Accepted 14 August 2017
Available online 19 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
T.  Kuroda Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 215–222A summary of typical procedures for assessing resurgence, renewal, and reinstatement.  “Target” and “Alt” stand for target and alternative responses, respectively. Phase 2ResurgenceReinstatement
Target reinforced;
Alt not reinforced
Target reinforced in Context A
Target reinforced
Target extinguished;
Alt reinforced
Target extinguished in Context B
Target extinguished
Target extinguished;
Alt extinguished
Target extinguished in Context A
Target extinguished; Response-independent delivery of reinforcer
contributing to the relapse.  The relapse of previously reinforced and
extinguished responding in these models indicates that decreases in
operant responding during extinction do not represent an elimination of
prior learning.  Instead, relapse indicates new learning involving the
extinction contingency [see 15]. 
Relapse of operant behavior has been demonstrated with a wide
variety of species in the three laboratory models of relapse serving as
the focus in this investigation (see Table 1).  First, resurgence is the relapse
of a previously reinforced and then extinguished response when
reducing or eliminating reinforcement for a more recently trained response
[e. g. ,19–22].  Hereafter, the response reinforced and then extinguished
will be referred to as the target response and the more recently
trained response as the alternative response.  Resurgence has been
demonstrated with rats [e. g. ,20,23], pigeons [e. g. ,24,25], Siamese
fighting fish [26], monkeys [27], and humans [e. g. ,28].  Recently, our
laboratory demonstrated resurgence with zebrafish for the first timeSecond, renewal is relapse due to changes in environmental context. 
Specifically, renewal is the return of a target response when changing
the global environmental context compared to the extinction context
[e. g. ,30,31,32].  Renewal occurs, for example, when reinforcing and
extinguishing the target response in different contexts and then (1)
returning to the training context (ABA renewal) or (2) transitioning to a
novel context (e. g. , ABC renewal).  Renewal of operant behavior has
been demonstrated with rats [30,33], pigeons [e. g. ,34,35], and humans
[36] but not yet with zebrafish. 
Finally, reinstatement is relapse resulting from exposure to a range of
events due to learning (e. g. , cues) or biological relevance (e. g. , stress)
[37].  One commonly used method for assessing reinstatement of an
extinguished target response is to present the event previously serving
as the reinforcer independently of responding [38,39].  Reinstatement
has been demonstrated with rats [e. g. ,40], pigeons [e. g. ,41,42], monkeys
[43,44], and humans [e. g. ,45,46].  Thus far, there have been no
demonstrations of reinstatement of operant behavior in zebrafish −
only reinstatement of a Pavlovian conditioned approach response to
drug (cocaine or nicotine) [10]. 
All these studies suggest relapse of previously reinforced and then
extinguished operant behavior is general across species.  These three
procedures serve as experimental models for understanding the conditions
under which relapse occurs and might be used as platforms to
examine biological influences in relapse, including developmental,
pharmacological, and neurobiological factors [16].  Nevertheless, research
on laboratory models of relapse using zebrafish has been limited. 
Therefore, the goals of the present study were to systematically replicate
resurgence and to extend the analysis to renewal, and reinstatement
of extinguished operant behavior in zebrafish using an
automated device to record discrete responses (i. e. , approaching sensors)
and deliver decapsulated brine shrimp eggs as reinforcers [11,12]. 
<Middle> General methods. 
2. 1.  Subjects
Forty experimentally naïve zebrafish (National Bioresource Project
of Japan, Riken Brain Science Institute), 7–8 months old at the start of
the experiments, served as subjects.  They were wild-type fish (i. e. , not
genetically modiﬁed).  Each ﬁsh was housed individually in a room with
a 14hr:10hr light-dark cycle (lights on at 6:00 am) in an aquarium
(13. 0-cm wide by 16. 8-cm long by 11. 3-cm high) connected to a pump
and tank where water was ﬁltered, aerated, and maintained at 28 °C
with a heater.  Water was kept at a pH level of 7. 5 and half of the water
in the tank was replaced weekly.  When a ﬁsh produced fewer than 30
reinforcers (decapsulated brine shrimp eggs) in a session, postsession
feedings of supplemental food (Kyorin, Hikari Labo 270) occurred
30 min after sessions. 
2. 2.  Material
Two types of automated device, similar to that described by Manabe
Name [11], were used.  Fig.  1 shows the device used to study resurgence
in Experiment 1.  The device was placed in the aquarium of each ﬁsh
during sessions and consisted of three sensors and two feeders ﬁxed on
Plexiglas.  The three sensors were for the target, alternative, and control
responses, as described below.  Each sensor consisted of a 2-mm diameter polymeroptical ﬁber (Mitsubishi Rayon Co. , LTD, Esca CK80), a
ﬁber sensor (Keyence FU-23X), an ampliﬁer (Keyence, FS-V21X), and a
tri-color LED (Oput-Supply OSTA5131A-C).  The tip of each sensor was
set 5 mm below the water surface and 5 mm away from the front wall of
the aquarium.  The sensor tips were 4. 5 cm apart from each other and
could be illuminated red, green, or blue.  A response was registered
when the ﬁsh approached and was at least within 5 mm below the
sensor tip. 
The feeders were located 2. 25 cm to the left and right of the middle
sensor.  Each feeder consisted of a servo motor (Futaba S3005), a brass
tube with the inner diameter of 600 μm, a 400-μm-diameter piano wire
inserted in the brass tube, a vibrator, and a white LED (i. e. , the feeder
light).  During reinforcement, the feeder light turned on immediately
upon a response, the servo motor pulled the piano wire, the vibrator
operated, decapsulated brine shrimp eggs were loaded into the brass
contributing to the relapse.  The relapse of previously reinforced and
extinguished responding in these models indicates that decreases in
operant responding during extinction do not represent an elimination of
prior learning. 