
The visual system has limited processing capacity, so simultaneous
stimuli present in the visual ﬁeld mutually suppress their evoked activity in the visual cortex.  Competition between stimuli can be resolved
by top-down mechanisms, such as selective attention, or by bottom-up
stimulus-driven mechanisms, such as saliency.  Selective attention to the
behavioral relevant stimuli is considered a top-down process, in which
high-level processing areas in the prefrontal and posterior parietal
cortices, exert a biasing signal towards the visual regions processing the
relevant items (Miller & D’Esposito, 2005).  As a consequence, sensory
regions show increased activity for the relevant vs the irrelevant items
(Armstrong, Fitzgerald, & Moore, 2006; Buﬀalo, Fries, Landman,
Liang, & Desimone, 2010), making stimulus processing more accurate
(Richter, Thompson, Bosman, & Fries, 2017).  Neural synchrony seems
to be a key mechanism to enhance neural representation of the attended
sensory input.  Several models postulate that gamma and alpha band
oscillations play a pivotal role in top-down processes such as selective
attention, with antagonist roles (Fries, Reynolds, Rorie, & Desimone,2008;
Oostenveld, & Desimone,Womelsdorf,
inhibition of
Jensen & Mazaheri, 2010; Klimesch Name, 2007; Womelsdorf, Fries,
Mitra, & Desimone, 2006).  Whereas gamma synchronization represents
a high excitability state of the underlying neural population (Fries Name,
2001), and is thus associated with processing of information; alpha
synchronization represents a state of low excitability and has been associated with the functional
task-irrelevant regions
(Jensen & Mazaheri, 2010).  In this line, alpha modulation in visual
areas represents an anticipatory visuospatial attention correlate.  Some
experiments have found an alpha power increase (or alpha synchronization) ipsilateral to the attended hemiﬁeld related to the suppression
of unattended neural representations (Kelly, Lalor, Reilly, & Foxe, 2006;
Rihs, Michel, & Thut, 2007;Worden, Foxe, Wang, & Simpson, 2000),
whereas others have found an alpha power decrease (or desynchronization) contralateral
to the attended hemiﬁeld (Kelly, GomezRamirez, & Foxe, 2009; Sauseng Name, 2005; Yamagishi, Goda, Callan,
Anderson, & Kawato, 2005) linked to enhancement of neural excitability in cortical areas processing the attended stimulus. 
Like visuospatial attention, working memory (WM) has capacity
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: pablo. campo@uam. es (P.  Campo). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 015
Received 8 March 2017; Received in revised form 17 July 2017; Accepted 18 July 2017
Available online 23 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
C.  Poch Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 63–70
restrictions, in which only limited amount of information can be represented during a short interval.  Top-down mechanisms have been
shown to operate during the maintenance interval to optimize WM
performance (Griﬃn & Nobre, 2003; Lepsien & Nobre, 2007).  Additionally, recent theoretical conceptualizations highlight the ﬂexible
nature of memory representations, which are maintained in diﬀerent
accessibility states and the allocation of attention can move them into a
high prioritized state (Lewis-Peacock & Postle, 2012; LaRocque, LewisPeacock, Drysdale, Oberauer, & Postle, 2013; Zokaei, Manohar,
Husain, & Feredoes, 2013, Zokaei, Ning, Manohar, Feredoes, & Husain,
2014; Heuer & Schubö, 2016a).  An eﬃcient experimental strategy to
study the beneﬁt of orienting attention to representations already held
in WM is presenting a spatial cue during the retention period indicating
which item is likely to be probed.  This is widely known as the retro-cue
paradigm, because the cue is provided after the memory set is encoded. 
The use of this paradigm has demonstrated that orienting attention to
perceptual representation, this is, before encoding, and orienting attention to memory representation, this is, after encoding, exhibit a similar behavioral beneﬁt (Griﬃn & Nobre, 2003; Myers, Walther, Wallis,
Stokes, & Nobre, 2015).  In addition, both processes elicit a similar
modulation of evoked visual activity (Griﬃn & Nobre, 2003).  These
results suggest that a common set of attentional control (i. e.  top-down)
mechanisms can be used in both cognitive contexts, this is, when selecting items in the outside world, and when selecting items among
internal representations (i. e. , WM).  While there is abundant research
about the patterns of neural oscillatory activity underlying attentional
processes in the perceptual domain, the modulation of oscillatory activity by the retro-cue has been much less studied. 
Similarly to orienting attention to the perceptual space, retro-cue
experiments also ﬁnd an alpha modulation related to orienting attention to memory representations (Nobre, Gitelman, Dias, & Mesulam,
2000; Kastner & Ungerleider, 2001; Poch, Campo, & Barnes, 2014;
Wallis, Stokes, Cousijn, Woolrich, & Nobre, 2015; Mok, Myers,
Wallis, & Nobre, 2016; Schneider, Mertes, & Wascher, 2016).  However,
contrary to the much studied phenomenon in perception, the characteristics of alpha modulations in WM are still under examination. 
Visuospatial attention experiments have proven useful to disentangle the neural generators of alpha modulation in order to determine
its functionality.  A recent MEG study found two dissociated generators
of alpha activity related to diﬀerent attentional mechanisms (Capilla,
Schoﬀelen, Paterson, Thut, & Gross, 2014).  While alpha ipsilateral increases arised from the dorsal stream to support attentional shifts,
contralateral alpha suppression in the ventral occipital cortex was related to feature processing.  This dissociation would be of great relevance in WM as it could provide further understanding of sensory
recruitment proposals which posit that maintenance of information is
accomplished by sensory cortices (Postle, 2006; Serences, Ester,
Vogel, & Awh, 2009). 
Whether item prioritization needs sustained attention to encoded
information or not is matter of debate.  Some authors have argued that
retro-cue guides attention to the relevant item, and that it stays under
focal attention until probe presentation (Makovsik & Jiang, 2007;
Matsukura, Luck, & Vecera, 2007; Makovski, Sussman, & Jiang, 2008;
Pertzov, Bays, Joseph, & Husain, 2013).  However, other authors have
found that sustained attention is not needed for the beneﬁt of the retro
cue (Hollingworth & Maxcey-Richard, 2013; Rerko, Souza, & Oberauer,
2014).  Convergently, electrophysiological experiments have found a
transient alpha lateralization related to attentional orienting (Mok
Name, 2016; Myers Name, 2015; Wallis Name, 2015).  In this line, it has
been proposed that transient alpha desynchronization is an index of
access to memory representation and, once a representation is accessed,
a change in the representational state takes place and alpha modulation
is no longer needed (Wolﬀ, Jochim, Akyürek, & Stokes, 2017). 
Behavioural studies have found divergent results about the extent of
the retro-cue beneﬁt.  Some authors reported that retrocue beneﬁts are
observed only for one single item (Makovsik & Jiang, 2007), whileothers have found that is possible to retrospectively orient attention to
more than one (Heuer & Schubö, 2016b).  Electrophysiological retro-cue
studies have mainly explored the eﬀects of retro-cueing one item
(Griﬃn & Nobre, 2003; Myers, Stokes, & Nobre, 2017; Schneider Name,
2016).  To our knowledge, the only electrophysiological work manipulating retro-cued load found that alpha power was modulated by relevant cued information (Manza, Hau, & Leung, 2014).  However, this
study used bilateral arrays, so it did not address alpha lateralization
diﬀerences related to selecting varying amounts of items. 
In the present study we use a retro-cue paradigm with three conditions, one-cue, two-cue, and neutral-cue.  We explore the dynamics of
alpha band activity related to the retro-cue and use source localization
to address the issues previously exposed.  We hypothesized that according to a current theory of item prioritization (Myers Name, 2017),
alpha desynchronization would transiently emerge from areas coding
sensory information. 