The Plastid Genome in Cladophorales Green Algae Is
Encoded by Hairpin ChromosomesHighlights
d The chloroplast genome of Cladophorales algae is
fragmented into hairpin chromosomes
d The hairpin chromosomes are short GC-rich ssDNA
molecules with one or two genes
d Chloroplast genes are highly divergent from their
corresponding orthologs
d Fragmentation of the chloroplast genome coincided with
gene transfer to the nucleusAndrea Del Cortona, Frederik Leliaert,
Kenny A.  Bogaert, . . . ,
Heroen Verbruggen,
Klaas Vandepoele, Olivier De Clerck
Correspondence
olivier. declerck@ugent. be
In Brief
Del Cortona Name describe intriguing
features of the plastid genome of
Cladophorales, which is fragmented into
linear ssDNA molecules that fold into
hairpin conﬁgurations due to the
presence of inverted repeats.  This
architecture is unprecedented among
eukaryotes, and highlights unexpected
variation in plastid genome structure. 
Del Cortona Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3771–3782
December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 004
Current BiologyThe Plastid Genome in Cladophorales Green Algae
Is Encoded by Hairpin Chromosomes
Andrea Del Cortona,1,2,3,4,11 Frederik Leliaert,1,5,11 Kenny A.  Bogaert,1 Monique Turmel,6 Christian Boedeker,7
Jan Janouskovec,8 Juan M.  Lopez-Bautista,9 Heroen Verbruggen,10 Klaas Vandepoele,2,3,4 and Olivier De Clerck1,12,*
1Department of Biology, Phycology Research Group, Ghent University, Krijgslaan 281, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
2Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Technologiepark 927, 9052 Zwijnaarde, Belgium
3VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Technologiepark 927, 9052 Zwijnaarde, Belgium
4Bioinformatics Institute Ghent, Ghent University, Technologiepark 927, 9052 Zwijnaarde, Belgium
5Botanic Garden Meise, Nieuwelaan 38, 1860 Meise, Belgium
6Institut de Biologie Integrative et des Syste` mes, Departement de Biochimie, de Microbiologie et de Bio-informatique, Universite Laval,
Pavillon Charles-Euge` ne-Marchand 1030, Avenue de la Medecine, Quebec City, QC G1V 0A6, Canada
7School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, New Kirk Building, Kelburn Parade, P. O.  Box 600, Wellington 6012,
New Zealand
8Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
9Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Alabama, 300 Hackberry Lane, Tuscaloosa, AL 35484-0345, USA
10School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Professors Walk, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
11These authors contributed equally
12Lead Contact
*Correspondence: olivier. declerck@ugent. be
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 004Virtually all plastid (chloroplast) genomes are circular double-stranded DNA molecules, typically between 100 and 200 kb in size and encoding circa
80–250 genes.  Exceptions to this universal plastid
genome architecture are very few and include the
dinoﬂagellates, where genes are located on DNA
minicircles.  Here we report on the highly deviant
chloroplast genome of Cladophorales green algae,
which is entirely fragmented into hairpin chromosomes.  Short- and long-read high-throughput
sequencing of DNA and RNA demonstrated that
the chloroplast genes of Boodlea composita are
encoded on 1- to 7-kb DNA contigs with an exceptionally high GC content, each containing a long inverted repeat with one or two protein-coding genes
and conserved non-coding regions putatively
involved in replication and/or expression.  We propose that
these contigs correspond to linear
single-stranded DNA molecules that fold onto themselves to form hairpin chromosomes.  The Boodlea
chloroplast genes are highly divergent from their
corresponding orthologs, and display an alternative
genetic code.  The origin of this highly deviant chloroplast genome most likely occurred before the
emergence of the Cladophorales, and coincided
with an elevated transfer of chloroplast genes
to the nucleus.  A chloroplast genome thatcomposed only of linear DNA molecules is unprecedented among eukaryotes, and highlights unexpected variation in plastid genome architecture. 
INTRODUCTION
Photosynthetic eukaryotes possibly originated 1. 9 billion years
ago following an endosymbiotic event in which a heterotrophic
ancestor of the Archaeplastida engulfed a cyanobacterium that
became stably integrated and evolved into a membrane-bound
organelle, the plastid [1, 2].  Following this primary endosymbiosis, an intricate history of plastid acquisition via eukaryoteeukaryote endosymbioses resulted in the spread of plastids to
distantly related eukaryotic lineages [3]. 
Plastids have retained a reduced version of the genome inherited from their cyanobacterial ancestor.  A core set of genes
involved in the light reactions of photosynthesis, ATP generation,
and functions related to transcription and translation is typically
retained [4].  Many genes have been lost or transferred to the nuclear genome and, as a result, plastids are dependent on nuclear-encoded, plastid-targeted proteins for the maintenance
of essential biochemical pathways and other functions such as
genome replication, gene expression, and DNA repair [5].  Nearly
all plastid genomes consist of a single circular-mapping chromosome, typically between 100 and 200 kb and encoding circa
80–250 genes [4, 6].  Diversity in size, gene content, density,
and organization of plastid genomes among different eukaryotic
lineages [7–9] is by and large limited, especially when compared
to mitochondria. 
Whereas fragmented mitochondrial genomes evolved several
times independently during the evolution of eukaryotes [8, 10],
fragmented plastid genomes are only known in dinoﬂagellates
[11] and a single green algal species [12].  In peridinin-containing
dinoﬂagellates,
the chloroplast genome is fragmented into
DNA minicircles of 2–3 kb, most of which carry one gene only
[11, 13].  Larger minicircles of up to 12 kb have also been
described [14], as well as minicircles containing two genes [15]
and ‘‘empty’’ minicircles without genes [16].  The genes located
on these minicircles mostly encode key components of the major
Current Biology 27, 3771–3782, December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd.  3771
Figure 1.  Boodlea composita
(A) Specimen in natural environment. 
(B) Detail of branching cells. 
(C) Detail of chloroplasts, each containing a single
pyrenoid, and forming a parietal network (the white
line is a calcium oxalate crystal). 
(D) Native agarose gel comparing genomic DNA of
Bryopsis plumosa (Bryopsidales) and Boodlea
composita (Cladophorales).  Lane 1: 1-kb ladder,
sizes in bp; lane 2: B.  plumosa; lane 3: B.  composita. 
HMW and low-molecular-weight (LMW) DNA bands
of B.  composita are indicated. 
See also Figure S1. 
plasmid-like DNA that has been observed
in the chloroplasts of several species
[29, 30].  These plasmid-like DNA molecules represent a low-molecular-weight
(LMW) DNA fraction, visible on agarose
gels of total DNA extracts (Figure 1D).  Pioneering work revealed that these structures are single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)
molecules of 1. 5–3. 0 kb that fold into a
hairpin conﬁguration and lack sequence
similarity to the nuclear DNA [31, 32]. the hairpin-like DNAs contain
putatively transcribed sequences with
similarity to chloroplast genes encoding
(psaB, psbB, psbC, and
subunits of photosystems I and II
psbF) [31]. 
Here we describe intriguing features of the plastid genome of
Cladophorales, focusing on Boodlea composita.  Through the
integration of different DNA sequencing methods, combined
with RNA sequencing, we found that chloroplast protein-coding
genes are highly expressed and encoded on 1- to 7-kb linear
ssDNA molecules.  Due to the widespread presence of inverted
repeats, these molecules fold into a hairpin conﬁguration.  A chloroplast genome that is composed only of linear DNA molecules is
unprecedented among eukaryotes, and highlights unexpected
variation in plastid genome architecture. 
<Middle> RESULTS AND DISCUSSION. 
DNA and RNA Sequencing Data
Our reconstruction of the chloroplast genome of B.  composita is
based on different high-throughput DNA sequencing methods
(Figure S1; STAR Methods).  The choice of short-read DNA
sequencing of isolated intact chloroplasts (chloroplast-enriched
fraction) using Roche 454 technology was based on comparable
sequencing approaches in other plants and algae that successfully resulted in assembly of chloroplast genomes [25].  To overcome possible assembly artifacts in a hypothetical scenario of
an inﬂated chloroplast genome bloated by repetitive elements,
long-read sequencing ofDNA fraction using the Paciﬁc Biosciences Single-Molecule
Real-Time (SMRT) method was applied, whereas long-read
sequencing of the LMW DNA fraction allowed characterization
of the previously observed plasmid-like DNA in the chloroplast
[29, 30].  To allow comparison of the results of Boodlea with
the high-molecular-weight
photosynthetic complexes, including subunits of photosystems I
and II, the cytochrome b6f complex, and ATP synthase, as well
as rRNAs and a few tRNAs [11].  The only other alga with a fragmented chloroplast genome is the green alga Koshicola spirodelophila, but here the level of fragmentation is minor: the plastid
genome is divided into three large circular chromosomes totaling
385 kb, with a gene content comparable to other green algae
[12].  In addition, plastid minicircles that coexist with a conventional plastid genome have been observed in a few algae,
including dinoﬂagellates with haptophyte-derived plastids [17]
and the green alga Acetabularia [18, 19]. 
Although plastid genomes generally assemble as circularmapping DNAs, they can take multiple complex conformations
in vivo, including multigenomic, linear-branched structures with
discrete termini [20, 21].  The alveolate Chromera velia is the
only known alga with a linear-mapping plastid genome with telomeric arrangement [22], and is also atypical in that several core
photosynthesis genes are fragmented.  Linear plastid genomes,
however, may be more widespread, as several plastid genomes
currently do not map as a circle [23]. 
Currently, and in stark contrast to other algae [9, 24–26], little
is known about the gene content and structure of the chloroplast genome in the Cladophorales (Ulvophyceae), an ecologically important group of marine and freshwater green algae,
which includes several hundreds of species.  These macroscopic multicellular algae have giant, multinucleate cells containing numerous chloroplasts (Figures 1A–1C).  Most attempts
to amplify common chloroplast genes have failed [27], with only
one highly divergent rbcL sequence published thus far for
Chaetomorpha valida [28].  An atypical plastid genome in
the Cladophorales is suggested by the presence of abundant
3772 Current Biology 27, 3771–3782, December 18, 2017gDNAcp 454 contigs
LMW_corr
HMW_corrtotal-RNARNA
cp 454 contigs
LMW_corr
HMW_corrtotal-RNAaccDatpA*atpDatpH*ccsAchlDclpBftsH*groELpetA*petD*petJpsaA*psaC*psaEpsaKpsbA*psbC*psbE*psbH*psbJ*psbL*psbT*rbcL*rpl2*rpl4rpl6rpl12rpl14*rpl19rpl21rpl23*rpl33rpoA*rpoC1*rps3*rps7*rps9*rps12*rps16rps18*tufA*ycf4*ycf47222285
16S (5' fragment)
16S (5')
16S (3' fragment)
16S (3')
contig 2oga
atpA fragmentcontig 4ogaB
contig 1oga
contig 3oga
contig 5oga
contig 7454
contig 9454
contig 10oga
contig 11oga
contig 13454
contig 15454
contig 17oga
contig 18454
contig 20454
contig 22oga
contig 24oga
contig 26oga
contig 31oga
contig 32oga
contig 33oga
contig 34ogaatpHpetA fragmentpetBpsaBpsbBcontig 6454atpHcontig 8454petA
contig 14oga
contig 16454petD
atpI fragment
contig 12454petB fragment
psaA fragmentpsaB fragmentspsbJ
contig 19oga
contig 21oga
psbA fragment
psbB fragment
contig 23oga
psbA fragmentpsbCpsbEcontig 28oga
psbD fragments
contig 25454contig 27oga
contig 29454psbLpsbTcontig 30454
psaB fragmentpsbTrbcL fragmentrbcL fragments
rRNA gene
Protein coding  gene
Repetitive elements
Current Biology 27, 3771–3782, December 18, 2017 3773
(legend on next page)
other species of Cladophorales, we generated additional DNA
sequence data from nine other species using Illumina HiSeq 2000
technology.  Finally, two deep-coverage RNA-seq (sequencing)
libraries, a total-RNA library, and an mRNA library enriched for
nuclear transcripts were generated to conﬁrm the transcription
of genes and to inform whether genes are nuclear versus plastid
encoded. 
A Prodigious Chloroplast Genome with a Reduced
Gene Set
Assembly of the chloroplast-enriched DNA reads generated using Roche 454 technology did not result in a typical circular chloroplast genome.  Instead, 21 chloroplast protein-coding genes
were found on 58 short contigs (1,203–5,426 bp): atpA, atpB,
atpH, atpI, petA, petB, petD, psaA, psaB, psaC, psbA, psbB,
psbC, psbD, psbE, psbF, psbJ, psbK, psbL, psbT, and rbcL. 
All but the rbcL gene code for components of the major thylakoid
transmembrane protein complexes (ATP synthase, cytochrome
b6f, and photosystems I and II).  The contigs contained inverted
repeats at their termini and, despite high coverage by sequence
reads, could not be extended by iterative contig extension. 
Sequence similarity searches and a metagenomic binning
approach (distribution analysis of 4-mers) demonstrated that
the inverted repeats were also found on contigs with no
sequence similarity to known proteins, raising the number of
contigs of chloroplast origin to 136.  These contigs are further
referred to as ‘‘chloroplast 454 contigs. ’’ The length distribution
of the chloroplast 454 contigs was consistent with the size of the
LMW DNA fraction as estimated by agarose gel electrophoresis
of Boodlea genomic DNA (Figure 1D; Figures S6A and S6B). 
The failure to assemble a circular chloroplast genome might be
due to repetitive elements that impair the performance of shortread assemblers [33].  Inﬂated chloroplast genomes bloated by
repetitive elements have been documented in several green
algae [34–36].  To overcome assembly artifacts and close putative gaps in the chloroplast 454 contigs, we applied SMRT
sequencing to the HMW and LMW DNA fractions.  Only 22
HMW DNA reads (ca.  0. 044%) harbored protein-coding genes
commonly present in chloroplast genomes of Archaeplastida
(Figure 2A).  All but three of these genes (psbA, psbB, and
psbC, which likely correspond to carry-over LMW DNA) contained spliceosomal introns, were absent in the chloroplast 454
contigs, and revealed a high ratio between mapped mRNA and
total-RNA reads, altogether suggesting that they are encoded
in the nucleus (Figure S2A).  Conversely, 22 chloroplast genes
(that is, the 21 protein-coding genes identiﬁed in chloroplast
454 contigs as well as the 16S rRNA gene) were found in the
LMW DNA reads (Figure 2A).  An orthology-guided assembly,
where the chloroplast 454 contigs harboring protein-coding
genes guided the assembly of LMW DNA reads with sequence
similarity to chloroplast genes, resulted in 34 contigs between
1,179 and 6,925 bp in length, henceforth referred to as the ‘‘chloroplast genome’’ (Figure 2B; Table S1). 
Four contigs of the Boodlea chloroplast genome (contigs 10,
19, 32, and 33) display long palindromic sequences that include
full-length coding sequences (CDSs) and a less conserved tail
region (Figure 2B).  The remaining contigs have similar palindromic structures but appear to be not completely assembled. 
Such palindromes allow regions of the single-stranded LMW
DNA molecules to fold into hairpin-like secondary structures. 
Additional smaller inverted repeats were identiﬁed in many of
the contigs (Figure 2B), which may result in more complex secondary structures. 
Chloroplast 454 contigs could not be scaffolded with long
HMW DNA reads, nor did a hybrid assembly between chloroplast 454 contigs and long HMW DNA reads generate a circular
chloroplast genome (Figure S1; STAR Methods).  The LMW DNA
reads are concordant and consistent with the palindromic sequences of the assembled chloroplast genome, indicating that
the palindromes are not a result of assembly artifacts (Figure 3;
Table S1).  As a consequence, we conclude that the chloroplast
genome is not a single large molecule but that it is instead fragmented into several molecules in the LMW DNA. 
A chloroplast genome that is entirely fragmented into hairpin
chromosomes is in line with earlier observations of abundant
LMW DNA in chloroplasts of several species of Cladophorales
[29].  The hairpin conﬁguration of the chromosomes derived
from our sequence data corresponds to earlier data based on
electron microscopy, endo- and exonuclease digestion experiments, acridine orange staining, and denaturing gel electrophoresis [29, 32].  Fluorescence in situ hybridization and Southern
blot hybridization indicated that these plasmid-like DNA molecules are present within the chloroplast only [30], supporting
the congruence between chloroplast 454 contigs and sequences from the LMW fraction (Figure 3; Figure S7A). 
The chloroplast genome contigs of Boodlea feature an exceptionally high GC content, ranging from 54% to 60% in the genecontaining contigs (average 57%) (Table S1).  These values are
concordant with the high density of the LMW fraction observed
in CsCl/bisbenzimide gradients [29], and also with sequence
data from cloned plasmids of Ernodesmis (51%–59% GC) [31]. 
Plastid genomes are generally AT rich and, in green algal species, GC content typically ranges between 26% and 43%
[9, 37].  GC-rich plastid genomes are very rare, but higher values
have been reported for the trebouxiophycean green algae Coccomyxa subellipsoidea, Paradoxia multiseta (both 51% GC), and
Figure 2.  Schematic Representation of the Boodlea Chloroplast Genome
(A) Distribution of Boodlea genes having orthologs in the chloroplast of other Archaeplastida.  gDNA (genomic DNA): chloroplast (cp) 454 contigs and HMW and
LMW DNA corrected reads; RNA: mRNA and total-RNA assemblies.  Asterisks indicate ‘‘core’’ chloroplast genes, i. e. , protein-coding genes conserved between
chloroplast genomes of Chlorophyta (see STAR Methods).  The following nine core chloroplast genes were not found in any of the Boodlea libraries sequenced:
atpF, petG, petL, psaJ, psbM, psbZ, rpl36, rps2, and ycf1.  Gray cells denote putative LMW DNA read contaminants as suggested by the ratios of HMW to LMW
DNA reads and mRNA to total-RNA reads (Figures S2B and S2C). 
(B) Overview of the 34 contigs representing the Boodlea chloroplast genome.  Purple arrows indicate rRNA genes, red arrows indicate CDSs of protein-coding
genes, and blue arrows indicate repetitive elements.  For each contig, repetitive elements with similar length indicate similar sequences.  The distance between the
vertical gray lines in the background represents 500 bp.  Oga: contig obtained by orthology-guided assembly; 454: chloroplast 454 contig. 
See also Figures S1–S3, S6, and S7 and Tables S1 and S3. 
3774 Current Biology 27, 3771–3782, December 18, 2017
Figure 3.  LMW DNA Reads Containing Chloroplast Genes Are Expressed, Enriched in the Total-RNA Fraction, and Congruent to the Respective Chloroplast 454 Contigs
(A) Representation of petA LMW DNA read (3,398 bp).  Red arrows indicate CDSs; blue arrows indicate inverted repeats (IR). 
(B) Corresponding Genome Browser track, from top to bottom: corrected HMW DNA coverage (0), corrected LMW DNA read coverage (range 0–541), 454 read
coverage (range 0–567), mRNA library read coverage (range 0–17), assembled mRNA transcripts mapped (0), total-RNA library read coverage (range 0–7,936),
and assembled total-RNA transcripts mapped (range 0–17). 
(C) Dotplot showing congruence between a petA LMW DNA read (x axis) and the corresponding petA-containing chloroplast 454 contig (y axis, 2,012 bp).  Green
lines indicate similar sequences; red lines indicate sequences similar to the respective reverse complements. 
See also Figures S1, S2, and S6. 
Trebouxiophyceae sp.  MX-AZ01 (58%)
however, feature standard plastid genome architectures. 
[24].  These species,
The size of the Boodlea chloroplast genome could not be estimated by inspection of k-mer frequency distributions of the
reads in the 454 library nor from those of the uncorrected and
corrected LMW DNA reads [38].  Histograms of k-mer frequency
distributions revealed several small peaks, indicating a heterogeneous population of molecules present in different stoichiometries, and the signal-to-noise ratio was too small to make a
comfortable estimation of the sizes (Figure S3).  The cumulative
Current Biology 27, 3771–3782, December 18, 2017 3775motif 1
GC%: 43. 5GC%: 46. 8GC%: 53. 4GC%: 83. 8GC%: 45. 7GC%: 35. 7atpIatpIIRIR
motif number 1 6 5452 32 365 6 1IRFigure 4.  Conserved Non-coding Motifs in Boodlea LMW DNA
(A) Sequence logos and GC contents of the conserved motifs predicted in the Boodlea chloroplast genome. 
(B) Schematic representation of the distribution of the motifs in the 1,441-bp ncDNA region from the atpI read used for the identiﬁcation of additional chloroplast
reads in the LMW DNA library.  Motifs with conserved orientation relative to the downstream genes are represented by green arrows, whereas motifs without
conserved orientation to the downstream genes are represented by yellow arrows.  CDSs are represented by red arrows; inverted repeats are represented by bluelength of the 34 Boodlea chloroplast genome contigs is 91 kb
(Table S3).  However, if we consider the large and heterogeneous
population of LMW DNA reads bearing no similarity to proteincoding genes (empty hairpin chromosomes; see below) as part
of the chloroplast genome, its size could be regarded as muchthe Volvox carteri
The largest known circular-mapping chloroplast genomes
have been documented in the red algae Bulboplastis apyrenoidosa (610 kb) and Corynoplastis japonica (1. 127 Mb), where
the genomes are bloated by group II introns and include transposable elements of possible bacterial origin [8].  Within green
algae, expanded chloroplast genomes have been reported in
two distinct clades: the Chlorophyceae and the Ulvophyceae. 
Inﬂation of the 521-kb chloroplast genome of Floydiella terrestris
(Chlorophyceae)
resulted mainly from the proliferation of
dispersed, heterogeneous repeats (>30 bp) in intergenic regions,
representing more than half of the genome length [36].  Intergenic
regions of
(Chlorophyceae) chloroplast
genome, instead, are populated with short palindromic repeats
(average size of 50 bp) that constitute ca.  64% of the predicted
525-kb genome [34].  The mechanisms by which such palindromic selﬁsh DNA spreads throughout the Volvox chloroplast
genome are not clear, but the presence of a reverse transcriptase and endonuclease may point toward retrotranscription
[34, 39].  For Acetabularia acetabulum (Ulvophyceae),chloroplast genome was sequenced only partially and its size
was estimated to exceed 1 Mb; it has exceptionally long intergenic regions and features long repetitive elements (>10 kb)
arranged in tandem [35, 40].  The Boodlea chloroplast genome
is rich as well
in non-coding DNA, constituting 92. 2% of the
136 chloroplast 454 contigs and 72. 8% of the assembled chloroplast genome, comparable to that
in inﬂated chloroplast
genomes of other green algae (F.  terrestris, 82. 1%; V.  carteri,
ca.  80%; A.  acetabulum, ca.  87% of the sequenced chloroplast
genome) [34, 35]. 
The non-coding DNA (ncDNA) regions of the hairpins showed
high sequence similarity among one another (52. 5%–100%
sequence similarity).  Within the ncDNA, we identiﬁed six
conserved motifs, 20–35 bp in length and with a GC content
3776 Current Biology 27, 3771–3782, December 18, 2017
ranging from 36% to 84%, which lack similarity to known regulatory elements (Figure 4).  Motifs 1, 2, and 5 were always present
upstream of the start codon of the chloroplast genes, occasionally in more than one copy.  Although their distances from the
start codon were variable, their orientations relative to the gene
were conserved, indicating a potential function as a regulatory
element of gene expression and/or replication of the hairpin
chromosomes. 
These motifs were also present in 1,966 (ca.  1. 8%) LMW DNA
reads lacking genes.  This observation supports earlier ﬁndings
of abundant non-coding LMW DNA molecules in the Cladophorales [29, 31].  In contrast, a very small fraction of the HMW DNA
reads (15 corrected reads) displayed the same ncDNA motifs,
and these were present exclusively on long terminal repeat retrotransposons (RT-LTRs) (Figures S2D and S2E).  RT-LTRs were
also abundant in the 454 contigs (Figure S6D).  The abundance
of RT-LTRs in the 454 contigs and the presence of ncDNA motifs
in both the Boodlea chloroplast genome and nuclear RT-LTRs
are suggestive of DNA transfer between the nucleus and chloroplast and may allude to the origin of the hairpin chromosomes. 
Hypothetically, an invasion of nuclear RT-LTRs in the chloroplast
genome may have resulted in an expansion of the chloroplast
genome and its subsequent fragmentation into hairpin chromosomes during replication.  Chloroplast genome fragmentation
could be caused by recombination between repetitive elements
and displacement of the palindromic sequences from the lagging
strand during the chloroplast genome replication [41, 42], and is
consistent with the expectation that recombination and cleavage
of repetitive DNA will produce a heterogeneous population of
molecules, as observed in dinoﬂagellate plastid genomes [11]
and in the Boodlea LMW DNA. 
A Fragmented Chloroplast Genome Is a Common
Feature of Cladophorales
DNA sequence data were obtained from 9 additional Cladophorales species, representing the main lineages of the order:
Chaetomorpha aerea, Cladophora albida, Cladophora socialis,
Cladophora vadorum, Dictyosphaeria cavernosa, Pithophora
sp. , Siphonocladus tropicus, Struvea elegans, and ValoniaCyanobacteria
red algae
glaucophyte
charophytes
& land plants
ChlorophytaCladophorales
Viridiplantae*
Archaeplastida*
Cyanobacteria 0. 4650. 518Virid. *Cyano.  0. 2820. 2820. 3769194TrentepohlialesFigure 5.  Boodlea Chloroplast Genes Have
Large Sequence Divergence
(A) Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree, with
indication of relevant bootstrap values (see also
Figure S4).  The scale represents 0. 5 substitution per
amino acid position. 
(B) Maximum pairwise amino acid sequence distances of the concatenated amino acid alignment
within and between clades (*, excluding Cladophorales). 
See also Figure S4 and Tables S4–S6. 
core Chlorophyta
Cladophorales
was not conserved, and therefore the
amino acid coded by the UGA codon could
not be determined with certainty. 
utricularis (Tables S2 and S4).  Although comparable sequencing
approaches resulted in the assembly of circular chloroplast genomes for other algae, including green seaweeds [43, 44], only
short chloroplast contigs (ca.  200–8,000 bp) were assembled
from these libraries, similar to B.  composita.  Interestingly, a
similar set of chloroplast genes was identiﬁed in all sequenced
Cladophorales species (Table S5).  In contrast to the genes found
in the Boodlea hairpin chromosomes, however, most of the chloroplast genes identiﬁed in the additional Cladophorales libraries
were fragmented, possibly due to assembly of the shorter
Illumina reads (Table S3).  These ﬁndings support the idea that
fragmentation of the chloroplast genome occurred before or
early in the evolution of the Cladophorales. 
Highly Divergent Chloroplast Genes
The 21 chloroplast protein-coding genes of Boodlea and the
other species of Cladophorales display extremely high sequence
divergence compared to orthologous genes in other photosynthetic organisms (Figure 5).  A maximum-likelihood phylogenetic
tree based on a concatenated amino acid alignment of 19 chloroplast genes from Archaeplastida and Cyanobacteria species
(Figure 5) shows that despite their high divergence, the Cladophorales sequences form a monophyletic group within the core
Chlorophyta (Figure S4), a position that is supported by phylogenetic analyses of nuclear genes [45].  The high sequence divergence of chloroplast genes in the Cladophorales supports the
notion that organellar genomes with extremely derived architectures, including those of peridinin-containing dinoﬂagellates,
also tend to fall at the extreme ends of the range observed at
the mutation rate (or gene sequence divergence) level [7, 46]. 
For some Boodlea chloroplast genes, the identiﬁcation of start
and stop codons was uncertain and a non-canonical genetic
code was identiﬁed (Figure 6).  The canonical stop codon UGA
was found 11 times internally in six genes (petA, psaA, psaB,
psaC, psbC, and rbcL) but was also present as a genuine termination codon in several genes, petA and psaA included.  At seven
of these 11 positions, the corresponding amino acid residue in
orthologous genes was conserved (i. e. 