Local Signals in Mouse Horizontal Cell DendritesHighlights
d Light-evoked Ca2+ signals in horizontal cell dendrites reﬂect
opsin gradient
d Chromatic preferences in neighboring dendritic tips vary
markedly
d Mouse horizontal cells process cone photoreceptor inputd Local horizontal cell feedback shapes the temporal
properties of cone outputCamille A.  Chapot, Christian Behrens,
Luke E.  Rogerson, . . . , Philipp Berens,
Thomas Euler, Timm Schubert
Correspondence
thomas. euler@cin. uni-tuebingen. detimm. schubert@cin. uni-tuebingen. deIn Brief
Chapot Name show that local light
responses in mouse horizontal cell
dendrites inherit properties, including
chromatic preference, from the
presynaptic cone photoreceptor,
suggesting that their dendrites can
provide private feedback to cones, for
instance, to shape the temporal ﬁltering
properties of the cone synapse. 
Chapot Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3603–3615
December 4, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 050
Current BiologyLocal Signals in Mouse Horizontal Cell Dendrites
Camille A.  Chapot,1,2,3 Christian Behrens,1,2,3,4 Luke E.  Rogerson,1,2,3,4 Tom Baden,1,5 Sinziana Pop,1,2,3
Philipp Berens,1,2,4 Thomas Euler,1,2,4,* and Timm Schubert1,2,6,*
1Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
2Center for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
3Graduate Training Centre of Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
4Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
5School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: thomas. euler@cin. uni-tuebingen. de (T. E. ), timm. schubert@cin. uni-tuebingen. de (T. S. )
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 050The mouse retina contains a single type of horizontal
cell, a GABAergic interneuron that samples from all
cone photoreceptors within reach and modulates
their glutamatergic output via parallel
feedback
mechanisms.  Because horizontal cells form an electrically coupled network, they have been implicated
in global signal processing, such as large-scale
contrast enhancement.  Recently, it has been proposed that horizontal cells can also act locally at the
level of individual cone photoreceptors.  To test this
possibility physiologically, we used two-photon microscopy to record light stimulus-evoked Ca2+ signals
in cone axon terminals and horizontal cell dendrites as
well as glutamate release in the outer plexiform layer. 
By selectively stimulating the two mouse cone opsins
with green and UV light, we assessed whether signals
from individual cones remain isolated within horizontal cell dendritic tips or whether they spread across
the dendritic arbor.  Consistent with the mouse’s opsin
expression gradient, we found that the Ca2+ signals
recorded from dendrites of dorsal horizontal cells
were dominated by M-opsin and those of ventral
horizontal cells by S-opsin activation.  The signals
measured in neighboring horizontal cell dendritic
tips varied markedly in their chromatic preference,
arguing against global processing.  Rather, our experimental data and results from biophysically realistic
modeling support the idea that horizontal cells can
process cone input locally, extending the classical
view of horizontal cell function.  Pharmacologically
removing horizontal cells from the circuitry reduced
the sensitivity of the cone signal to low frequencies,
suggesting that local horizontal cell feedback shapes
the temporal properties of cone output. 
INTRODUCTION
Most neurons in the brain have elaborate dendritic arbors
capable of more than simply integrating synaptic input.  Studies
of neurons from different brain regions, such as cerebellar Purkinje cells [1], cortical pyramidal cells [2], hippocampal neurons
[3], and retinal amacrine cells [4, 5], have demonstrated that dendrites can be functionally highly compartmentalized.  Often,
multiple dendritic units can both process synaptic input and
generate synaptic output independently and at a local scale
(reviewed in [6]).  The cellular mechanisms supporting dendritic
processing include anatomical specializations, differential distribution of active channels, and the local restriction of intracellular
signaling (reviewed in [6]).  Moreover, computational work suggests that dendrites can even switch between local and global
signal processing [7].  Such functional compartmentalization of
dendritic arbors greatly increases the computational power of
single neurons and, therefore, that of the brain. 
In the retina, dendritic processing has been mainly studied in
ganglion cells [8, 9] and amacrine cells [4], where dendritic subunits vary dramatically in size and function.  For example, starburst amacrine cell dendritic arbors are divided in sections that
individually compute direction of visual motion [10, 11], while individual dendritic varicosities of A17 amacrine cells provide local
reciprocal feedback to individual rod bipolar cell terminals under
low-light conditions [4].  However, the outer retina also contains a
candidate for dendritic processing, the horizontal cell (HC).  This
is a GABAergic interneuron that provides reciprocal feedback
to photoreceptors and shapes their transmitter release [12–14]. 
The dendrites of HCs contact cone photoreceptors (cones),
whereas their axon terminal system contacts rod photoreceptors
(rods) [15]. 
Traditionally, HCs have been implicated in global processing,
such as contrast enhancement and the generation of antagonistic center-surround receptive ﬁelds (reviewed in [16]).  This is
consistent with the fact that HCs form a gap junction-coupled
network [17], which allows averaging signals across many
cones.  However, recent studies suggest that HCs support also
a local mode of operation and that HC feedback can act at the
level of a single synaptic contact between an HC dendritic tip
and a cone ([14, 18]; for discussion see [19]) (Figures 1A and 1B). 
Here, we test this idea by recording light stimulus-evoked signals at the HC-cone synapse in a slice preparation of the mouse
retina using two-photon Ca2+ [20, 21] and glutamate imaging
[22].  We exploited the particular retinal distribution of mouse
cone types to discriminate between global and local processing:
Mice express two types of cone opsins, a short (S, UV) and a
medium (M, green) wavelength-sensitive opsin.  So-called true
S-cones [23] exclusively express S-opsin and are homogenously
Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd.  3603
Figure 1.  Identiﬁcation of Cone Axon Terminals and HC Processes in Mouse Retinal Slices
(A) Schematic representation of the connectivity between S- (blue) or M-cones (green) and a horizontal cell (HC, orange).  The box corresponds to the enlarged
schemata shown in (B).  The black line indicates the cone axon terminal base. 
(B) Neighboring S- and M-cones with postsynaptic HC dendrites.  Bipolar cell dendrites are shown in white.  The arrows indicate the hypothesized spread of
signals in HC dendrites.  Left: global (lateral) signal spread along HC dendrites.  Right: local signal processing in HC dendritic tips. 
(C and D) Bath application of sulforhodamine 101 (SR101) (top images in C and D) to identify cone axon terminals in retinal slices of the Cx57+/cre 3 Ai38 (C) and
HR2. 1:TN-XL (D) mouse lines.  Outlines of cone axon terminals were manually drawn for illustration purposes; solid lines indicate cone axon terminal base, and
dotted lines indicate outer plexiform layer (OPL) borders.  Upper right diagram depicts imaged synaptic compartment and the biosensor used (red). 
(E) Left: SR101 ﬂuorescence with line marking the cone axon terminal base (analogous to A, C, and D).  Right: GCaMP3-labeled HC processes are superimposed
by regions of interest (ROIs; gray, exemplary ROI marked red) automatically determined (STAR Methods). 
(F) Ca2+ responses to green, UV, and white (GUW) 1 s light ﬂashes of exemplary ROI (in E).  The continuous Ca2+ trace (left) and average of n = 10 trials for each
stimulus condition (right) are shown (Ca2+ signals de-trended by high-pass ﬁltering at 0. 1 Hz and z-normalized; STAR Methods).  Scale bars, 5 mm. 
See also Figure S1. 
distributed across the retina, while M-cones co-express both
opsins at a ratio that changes from M- to S-opsin dominant along
the dorsoventral axis [24].  Thus, recording at different retinal
locations with different-wavelength stimuli makes it possible to
test if signals of neighboring cones mix in the postsynaptic HC
dendritic process.  We found that cone signals indeed remain
local in the contacting HC dendritic tips, suggesting that HCs
support a local mode of operation. 
3604 Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Identiﬁcation of Cone Axon Terminals and HC Processes
in the Mouse Retinal Slice
We recorded Ca2+ signals in retinal slices prepared from transgenic mice (Cx57+/cre 3 Ai38; see the STAR Methods).  HC
processes could be identiﬁed in retinal slices by their GCaMP3
expression (Figure 1C).  To identify cone axon terminals, we
bath-applied SR101 [25], which is taken up from the extracellular
solution by the terminals of synaptically very active cells, such as
photoreceptors, during vesicle endocytosis [26].  We conﬁrmed
that the (larger) SR101-labeled structures in the outer plexiform
layer (OPL) were cone axon terminals with slices prepared
from HR2. 1:TN-XL mice [21], in which exclusively cones expressed TN-XL (Figure 1D). 