Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 98–104
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biological Psychology
journal homepage: www. elsevier. com/locate/biopsycho
Interaction between prenatal risk and infant parasympathetic and
sympathetic stress reactivity predicts early aggression
J.  Suurlanda,b,⁎, K. B.  van der Heijdena,b, S. C. J.  Huijbregtsa,b, S. H. M.  van Goozena,c, H.  Swaaba,ba Department of Clinical Child and Adolescent Studies, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
b Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
c School of Psychology, Cardiﬀ University, Cardiﬀ, United Kingdom
A R T I C L E I N F O
A B S T R A C T
Keywords:
Aggression
Stress reactivity
Autonomic nervous system
Prenatal riskNonreciprocal action of the parasympathetic (PNS) and sympathetic (SNS) nervous systems, increases susceptibility to emotional and behavioral problems in children exposed to adversity.  Little is known about the PNS and
SNS in interaction with early adversity during infancy.  Yet this is when the physiological systems involved in
emotion regulation are emerging and presumably most responsive to environmental inﬂuences.  We examined
whether parasympathetic respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) and sympathetic pre-ejection period (PEP) response and recovery at six months, moderate the association between cumulative prenatal risk and physical
aggression at 20 months (N = 113).  Prenatal risk predicted physical aggression, but only in infants exhibiting
coactivation of PNS and SNS (i. e. , increase in RSA and decrease in PEP) in response to stress.  These ﬁndings
indicate that coactivation of the PNS and SNS in combination with prenatal risk is a biological marker for the
development of aggression. andbiological
Exposure to adversity during the prenatal period, such as maternal
psychiatric problems, substance (ab)use, single parenthood and poverty, has been shown to predict aggression in childhood that persists
into adolescence
and adulthood (Côté, Vaillancourt, LeBlanc,
Nagin, & Tremblay, 2006; Hay Name, 2011; NICHD Early Child Care
Research Network, 2004).  Yet, not all children seem to be equally affected by adversity.  Guided by theories of diﬀerential susceptibility
(Belsky & Pluess,(Boyce & Ellis, 2005), a number of studies have demonstrated that individual diﬀerences in stress reactivity, as measured by indices of the
cardiac autonomic nervous system (ANS), can predispose or protect
against the eﬀects of adversity on children’s behavioral maladjustment
(e. g.  El-Sheikh & Erath, 2011).  Although these studies provide important insights into physiological measures of susceptibility, they have
focused mostly on older children.  Little is known about the role of the
cardiac ANS in interaction with early adversity during infancy when the
physiological systems involved in emotion regulation are emerging and
presumably most responsive to environmental inﬂuences (Beauchaine,
Neuhaus, Brenner, & Gatzke-Kopp, 2008; Laurent, Harold, Leve,
Shelton, & Van Goozen, 2016). 
sensitivity
Altered ANS functioning has been consistently linked to aggression
in children,
(Van Goozen, Fairchild,
Snoek & Harold, 2008).  The ANS is comprised of a sympathetic (SNS)
and adults
adolescents
and parasympathetic (PNS) branch.  PNS activity is often assessed by
respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA).  RSA is the heart rate variability at
the frequency of respiration (Cacioppo, Uchino, & Berntson, 1994), and
is considered to index the neural control of the heart via the vagus
nerve (Porges, 2007).  During restful periods, the vagus exerts an inhibitory inﬂuence on the heart acting as a ‘brake’ by increasing vagal
output to the sino-atrial (SA) node of the heart and limiting sympathetic
inﬂuences which contribute to a slow and steady heart rate.  In response
to stress, the vagal ‘brake’ is disengaged resulting in a decrease in vagal
output to the SA node of the heart and thus contributing to an increase
in heart rate (Porges, 2007).  If withdrawal of the vagal ‘brake’ is not
suﬃcient to manage a stressor, the sympathetic activity is expected to
increase in order to prepare the body for a more active stress response. 
The majority of research examining stress reactivity in young children has focused on RSA or global measures of cardiac autonomic
functioning like HR without speciﬁc assessments of activity within the
sympathetic branch.  Pre-ejection period (PEP) reﬂects the time interval
between the onset of the heartbeat and ejection of blood into the aorta
(Cacioppo Name, 1994) and is commonly used as an index of myocardial
contractility and sympathetic control of the heart (Berntson Name,
1994).  Both RSA and PEP are used as indicators of the complex processes that underlie responsiveness of the ANS to a changing environment, e. g. , from rest (baseline) to challenge or vice versa. 
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Clinical Child and Adolescent Studies, Leiden University, Wassenaarseweg 52, Box 9555, 2300 RB Leiden, Room 4A03, The Netherlands. 
E-mail address: suurlandj@fsw. leidenuniv. nl (J.  Suurland). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 005
Received 21 October 2016; Received in revised form 11 July 2017; Accepted 11 July 2017
Available online 15 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
J.  Suurland Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 98–104
Low baseline PNS activity, as indicated by RSA, has been identiﬁed
as a vulnerability factor that exacerbates the relation between adversity
(e. g. 