
The incidence of stress-related disorders, such as depression, is approximately twice as high in women as in men [1,2].  In addition, the
symptoms and pharmacological treatments of these conditions diﬀer in
both sexes [3].  This disparity could be due to physiological and behavioral sexual diﬀerences in response to the same stressor or diﬀerences
in the stimuli perceived as stressful [4–6].  Despite these ﬁndings, the
contribution of these diﬀerences to the development of stress-related
disorders in women is poorly understood.  This lack of knowledge may
be due to bias toward males in research in this ﬁeld, perhaps because of
the need for a homogeneous sample devoid of hormonal ﬂuctuations
[7] or the lack of a social stress model appropriate for females. 
Chronic social stress is considered the most common etiological
factor in the precipitation of depressive disorders in humans [8].  In
preclinical studies, a commonly used animal model of social stress is
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: l. garmendia@ehu. eus (L.  Garmendia). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 002
Received 8 May 2017; Received in revised form 10 July 2017; Accepted 1 August 2017
Available online 05 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
social defeat in male rodents.  This model is based on the resident-intruder paradigm, where subjects interact aggressively to establish
dominance over the territory [9].  This model has been very useful in
establishing the mechanisms underlying depressive symptoms [10,11]
but is not considered adequate to induce chronic social stress in females
because females do not exhibit territorial aggression [12,13].  Given the
importance of social support in coping with stress in females [6], the
disruption of the social network may be a more valid social stressor. 
Thus, the chronic social instability stress model used in rats [12] and
mice [14] seems to be a better suited stress model given the social
nature of females.  This model consists of interrupting the animals’ social network, alternating periods of
isolation and crowding with
membership rotation.  Although few studies have used this model and
the protocols used in these studies diﬀer, the results have shown
changes in the HPA axis in both rats and mice.  These studies also describe anxiety and depressive-like behavioral changes in conventional
A.  Labaka Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 8–18
behavioral tests, but data are still inconclusive [14–17].  Moreover, the
eﬀects of CSI on the immune and monoaminergic systems, which play
an essential role in the pathology of depression [18,19], are unknown. 
A large body of evidence supports the association between increases
in the production of inﬂammatory cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)1β, IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and the pathogenesis
of aﬀective disorders [20,21].  These data have been supported by animal models in which psychosocial stress, in addition to resulting in
inﬂammatory immune activation, produces behavioral changes associated with depression.  An increase in inﬂammatory cytokine levels has
also been observed in brain structures involved in aﬀective disorders,
such as the prefrontal cortex, amygdale and hippocampus [22,23]. 
Although most research has focused on the increase of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, several studies indicate that an imbalance between pro- and anti-inﬂammatory cytokines can produce lasting
changes in brain function and attribute a protective role to anti-inﬂammatory cytokines, such as IL −10, thereby highlighting their role
in depressive behavior [24,25]. 
Many studies have focused on the impact of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines on monoaminergic function.  Speciﬁcally,
the enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), activated by pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, metabolizes TRYP into KYN, leading to serotonin reduction,
which has been implicated in depression [26].  In addition, the activation of kynurenine metabolic pathways may lead to the formation of
neurotoxic products, including 3-HK, a precursor of the quinolinic acid
[27] which increase has been associated with severe depression [28]. 
Pro-inﬂammatory cytokines may also aﬀect monoaminergic transmission by increasing the function of their reuptake pumps and/or decreasing the availability of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), a key enzyme cofactor in the synthesis of all monoamines [29]. 
In the context of this work, which analyzes the eﬀects of social stress
on females, in addition to the well-documented inﬂuence of the HPA
axis in the regulation of immune function [30], the role of female sex
steroids must be also considered.  The modulation of immune responses
by estrogen is complex because it may increase or decrease the production of inﬂammatory cytokines depending on the context, its concentration or type of receptor to which it binds [31].  Estrogens, similar
to other sex steroids, alter the functioning of immune cells by binding to
speciﬁc receptors that are expressed in the immune system.  In the brain,
ERα and ERβ have been identiﬁed in glial cells [32], and some studies
suggest that estrogen exhibits anti-inﬂammatory properties by binding
to ERβ [33].  In this sense, it has been observed that estrogens modulate
inﬂammation in the hippocampus and anxiety and depressive-like behaviors via ERβ [34]. 
In this work, we studied in female mice the eﬀect of CSI on behavior
and diﬀerent systems associated to stress related aﬀective disorders.  For
this purpose, we assessed behavior in the FST and sucrose preference
test (SPT), as well as barbering behavior, since this behavior was observed in stressed mice throughout the experiment.  We also measured
hippocampal changes in the expression of the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α and the anti-inﬂammatory cytokine IL-10
as well as monoaminergic activity.  Taking into account the relationship
between monoaminergic and immune activity, the expression of IDO
and the levels of TRYP, KYN and 3-HK in the same brain structure were
measured.  The hippocampus was chosen because, in addition to interacting with other structures related to depression, such as the prefrontal
cortex, amygdala and striatum, it is also a structure that is particularly
sensitive to the eﬀects of stress and sex hormones [35].  Moreover, it
plays an important role in the stress-induced inﬂammatory response
[36].  Finally, we assessed the eﬀect of this chronic stress model on the
HPA and HPG systems by measuring the levels of plasma corticosterone
and estradiol and their receptors in the brain.  In addition, estrous cycle
was also studied. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Animals
Sixty-two 8-week-old female CD1 mice (Janvier Labs, France) were
housed in groups of three for 7 days in transparent plastic cages measuring 24. 5 × 24. 5 × 15 cm.  Food and water were available ad libitum. 
The holding room was maintained at a constant temperature of 20 °C
with a reversed 12-h light/dark cycle (white lights on from 20:00 to
08:00 h), to enable mouse manipulation during the animal’s active
phase (dark).  All experimental procedures were conducted under dim
red light conditions in a room adjacent to the holding facility.  The
European regulations for the care and treatment of experimental animals were followed, and the procedures were controlled and approved
by the Diputación Foral de Gipuzkoa, Spain, in compliance with the
European Directive (2010/63/EU) on the protection of animals used for
scientiﬁc purposes (22 September 2010).  The procedures were approved by the Ethical Committee for animal welfare of the Basque
Country University (CEBA). 
2. 2.  Experimental procedure
The experiment began after a 7-day adaptation period.  A control
group (n = 30) and a group of socially stressed mice (n = 32) were
established.  Chronic social instability stress was applied to the stress
group during a 28-day period.  The control mice remained in same
conditions as the habituation time.  Blood was collected via submandibular vein puncture on days 1 and 25 for all subjects (N = 62) to
measure plasma corticosterone levels.  Body weight was measured at the
beginning and at the end of stress period.  Vaginal smears were collected
at the start (days 1–4) and at the end (days 25–28) of the procedure to
determine the estrous cycle phase.  On day 29, half of the animals from
the control group (n = 15) and half from the stressed group (n = 16)
were sacriﬁced by cervical dislocation.  Blood was immediately collected by cardiac puncture to determinate plasma estradiol concentration, the brain was removed, and the whole hypothalamus and hippocampi were dissected and analyzed.  All dissections were performed
under sterile conditions and stereomicroscopic observation with reference to the mouse brain atlas [37].  These samples were stored at
−80 °C until they were used for biological measurements.  After the
mice were sacriﬁced, a barbering assessment was performed.  On day
29, the remaining stressed (n = 16) and control (n = 15) mice were
singly housed to perform the sucrose preference and food intake test for
24 h.  Then, the control mice were returned to their original cage mates,
while the stressed mice remained isolated until the forced swimming
test was performed on day 31.  Finally, the animals were sacriﬁced. 
Barbering was not assessed in this case, because isolation prevented this
behavior.  (Fig.  1). 
2. 3.  Stress procedure
The female mice were stressed using the chronic social instability
stress model, which was adapted and modiﬁed from a protocol described by Haller Name [12] in rats and by Schmidt Name [14] in mice. 
The mice were exposed to a highly unstable social situation with alternating phases of isolation (1 day) and crowding (4 per cage, during
3 days) over 28 days.  During each crowding phase, we ensured that
four diﬀerent mice that had no previous contact were placed together in
a new clean cage. 
2. 4.  Behavioral assessment
2. 4. 1.  SPT and food intake
The control and stressed mice that were assigned to the behavioral
tests were individually housed and were oﬀered a free choice between
two bottles for 24 h; one bottle contained a 0. 8% sucrose solution, andA.  Labaka Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 8–18
Fig.  1.  Experimental procedure. 
one bottle contained water.  To prevent the possible eﬀects of a side
preference in drinking, the position of the bottles was counterbalanced. 
At the same time, the mice were provided four pellets.  The animals
were not deprived of food or water before the test.  The consumption of
the sucrose solution, water and food was measured by weighing the
bottles and the pellets at the beginning and end of the test.  The consumption of sucrose and food was expressed in relation to body weight. 
The sucrose preference was calculated as percentage of sucrose consumption vs.  sucrose plus water consumption. 
2. 4. 2.  FST
Individual mice were placed in glass cylinders (height 18. 5 cm and
diameter 12. 5 cm) containing 13. 5 cm of water at 25 ± 1° C for 6 min. 
The test was performed 24 h after the SPT and was recorded for subsequent assessment.  The following behaviors were assessed:
immobility, swimming and climbing.  The latency, frequency and time
spent engaged in each behavior were recorded manually by an experimenter blinded to the stress condition, using The Observer 4. 0
program (Noldus, ITC, Wageningen, Netherlands). 
2. 4. 3.  Whisking assessment
As the mice showed no traces of barbering on any body parts other
than the snout, we speciﬁcally examined whisking signs at the moment
of sacriﬁce.  Whisking is a type of hetero-barbering in which the socalled barber holds a cage mate down and cuts its vibrissae with its
incisors [38,39].  Whisker length was assessed by a trained observer and
classiﬁed using the following two-point scale: (1) intact whiskers— for
no deterioration of the vibrissae and (2) shortened whiskers—for
shortening or removal of the vibrissae. 
2. 5.  Physiological determinations
2. 5. 1.  Blood collection and plasma isolation
The blood was collected from all subjects (N = 62) by submandibular vein puncture on days 1 and 25 between 9:00 and 10:00
a. m.  for the corticosterone measurement.  On day 29, after analyzing
vaginal smears, the blood was collected by cardiac puncture (n = 31)
for the estradiol measurement.  The blood was stored in heparinized
containers and then centrifuged at 1800 x g for 15 min at 4 °C.  The
resulting plasma was collected and stored at −70 °C until it was assayed. 2. 5. 2.  Determination of plasma corticosterone concentrations
The plasma corticosterone concentrations (ng/ml) at days 1 and 25
were determined using a commercially available enzyme immunoassay
kit (Assay Designs, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) and a Synergy HT microplate
reader (BioTek Instruments, Inc. , Winooski, VT, USA).  The sensitivity of
the assay was 5 pg/ml, and the intra- and inter-assay variation coeﬃcients were 7% and 8%, respectively. 
2. 5. 3.  Determination of plasma estradiol (E2) concentrationsavailable
commercially
The plasma estradiol concentrations (ng/ml) at day 29 were determined using
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (Calbiotech, Spring Valley, CA, USA) and a Synergy
HT microplate reader (BioTek Instruments, Inc. , Winooski, VT, USA). 
The sensitivity of the assay was 3 pg/ml, and the intra- and inter-assay
variation coeﬃcients were 3. 1% and 9. 9%, respectively. 
2. 5. 4.  Determination of estrous cycle phases
The vaginal smears were collected during days 1–4 and 25–28 from
all subjects using a cotton swab dampened with saline.  Then, the smears
were microscopically analyzed to identify the phases of the estrous
cycle using the following standard criteria [40]: (a) proestrous was
characterized by a predominance of nucleated epithelial cells; (b) estrous was characterized by large clumps of anucleated corniﬁed cells;
(c) metestrous was characterized by the same proportions of leukocytes,
corniﬁed, and nucleated epithelial cells; and (d) diestrous was characterized by a predominance of leukocytes. 
2. 5. 5.  Real-Time RT −PCR measurements of mRNA expression in the
hypothalamus and hippocampus
The total RNA of each structure was isolated using the NucleoSpin
RNA Plus kit (Macherey Nagel, Germany).  A UV spectrophotometric
analysis was performed at 260 nm to determine the RNA concentrations, while the 260:280 absorbance ratio was utilized to assess the
nucleic acid purity.  (Synergy HT, BioTek Instruments, Inc. , Winooski,
VT, USA).  The total RNA was then reverse-transcribed with the
PrimeScript RT reagent kit (Takara Bio Inc. , Madrid, Spain).  The resulting
SYBR Green-based
(SYBR®Premix Ex TaqTM, Takara Bio Inc. , Madrid, Spain) real-time
PCR, and the formation of PCR products was monitored using the 7500
Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Madrid, Spain).  The cDNA
sequences were obtained from GenBank at the National Center for
cDNA levels were
quantiﬁed by
A.  Labaka et al. PCR primer speciﬁcation. 
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 8–18
Function
Primer sequences (5′ → 3′)
Analyzed structure
GenBank accession No. 
NM_008361. 3
NM_031168. 1
NM_010548
NM_013693. 2
NM_007956
NM_207707
X66367. 1
AJ311855. 1
BC049931. 1
NM_008084. 2
NM_013556. 2IL-1βIL-10ERαGRIDO
Pro-inﬂammatory cytokine
Pro-inﬂammatory cytokine
Anti-inﬂammatory cytokine
Pro-inﬂammatory cytokine
Estrogen receptor α
Estrogen Receptor β
Glucocorticoid receptor
Mineralocorticoid receptor
Rate-limiting enzyme of tryptophan
catabolism
Hippocampus
F: GATGATAACCTGCTGGTGTGTGA R:
GTTGTTCATCTCGGAGCCTGTAG
F: AGCCAGAGTCCTTCAGAGA R: TCCTTAGCCACTCCTTCTGT
F: GCCAAGCCTTATCGGAAATG R: CCGCATCCTGAGGGTCTTC
F: GACGTGGAACTGGCAGAAGAG R: TGCCACAAGCAGGAATGAGA
F: AAGGCGGCATACGGAAAGA R: CATTTCGGCCTTCCAAGTCA
Hippocampus
Hippocampus
Hippocampus
Hippocampus
Hypothalamus
F: CCAGACTGCAAGCCCAAATGT R: AGAAGCGATGATTGGCAGTGG Hippocampus
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamus
F: CCCATGGAGGTAGCGATTGT R: TGTAAAGGCTGCCCAATGTGT
F: ACCTGCAGAGAGGACCAATGA R:
GGAGTAATTCGTGTTTTTCTTTGCT
F: AAAGCAATCCCCACTGTATCCA R: TGCCTTTTCCAATGCTTTCAG Hippocampus
GAPDH Catalizyng enzyme of glycolysis
F: CGGCCGCATCTTCTTGTG R: GTGACCAGGCGCCCAATACCatalizyng transferase of hypoxanthine
F: TGGGAGGCCATCACATTGT R: TCCAGCAGGTCAGCAAAGAAC
Hippocampus
Hypothalamus
Hippocampus
Hypothalamus
Biotechnology Information (www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov).  Both hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl
transferase (HPRT) and glyceraldehyde-6phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) were used as the reference genes. 
The primer sequences were designed using Primer Express Software
v3. 0 (Applied Biosystems, Madrid, Spain), and obtained from Applied
Biosystems (Table 1).  The relative gene expression was determined
using the 2−DΔt method [41]. 
2. 5. 6.  Determination of hippocampal monoamines, their metabolites and
amino acids by HPLC(DOPAC),
To determine the monoaminergic activity in the hippocampus, the
dopamine (DA), noradrenaline (NA) and serotonin (5-HT) levels were
analyzed, as well as their respective metabolite levels, including: 3,4dihydroxyphenylacetic
3-Methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG) and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA).  The
serotonin precursor TRYP, KYN, and 3-HK were also determined.  All the
analytes were analyzed via high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC).  The HPLC equipment comprised an Agilent 1200 LC system
(Agilent Technologies, Madrid, Spain) equipped with a vacuum degasser, quaternary pump, cooled autosampler, thermostted column
compartment, and ﬂuorescence and variable wavelength detectors.  The
chromatographic separation was performed on a Poroshell 120 EC-C18
column (100 × 4. 6 mm, 2. 7 μm) protected by a cartridge guard column
(Agilent Technologies).  The mobile phase comprised 0. 05% triﬂuoroacetic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile (solvent B).  The ﬂow was
maintained at a constant rate of 0. 5 ml/min.  The gradient elution
program was as follows: from 0 to 8 min, 6% solvent B (v/v); from 8 to
15 min, 10% solvent B (v/v); from 15 to 22 min, 20% solvent B (v/v);
and from 22 to 25 min, 2% solvent B (v/v).  The column was maintained
at 30 °C during the analysis, and the samples were maintained at 4 °C in
an autosampler unit.  The eﬄuent was monitored with the ﬂuorescence
detector at the emission wavelengths of 320 nm for DA, DOPAC, NA
and MHPG and 366 nm for 5-HT, 5-HIAA and TRYP.  For these analyses,
the excitation wavelength was 210 nm.  The eﬄuent of KYN and 3-HK
was monitored with variable wavelength detector set at 360 nm.  The
total sample analysis time was 25 min. 
Prior to the sample preparation, the frozen tissues were weighed on
AG204 analytical scales (Mettler-Toledo International, Inc. 