
The basolateral amygdala (BLA) has been shown to play a pivotal
role in the neural circuitry of stress and mediates the eﬀects of stress on
memory related processes [1,2].  This region has a critical role in fear,
anxiety and activation of
the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis
which results in the release of glucocorticoid hormones (main hormones involved in stress) [3,4].  It was established that chronic stress
elicits structural changes such as increased dendritic branching and
increased number of spines in BLA projection neurons [5,6].  Besides,
previous evidence revealed that glucocorticoids enhance the excitability of principal BLA cells [7] and systemic injections of glucocorticoids enhance baseline responses in BLA in a dose-dependent manner
[2].  Moreover, Rosenkranz Name clariﬁed that chronic stress increased
excitability of BLA projection neurons recorded in vivo [8] and Cui
Name suggested that exposure to a single prolonged stress paradigm
followed by a 7 days recovery period identiﬁed increases in total dendritic length and branch points of BLA pyramidal neurons [1]. 
On the other hand, there are numerous studies indicating that the
BLA mediates stimulus-reward learning that is required for a conditioned stimulus to gain incentive motivational and conditioned reinforcing value [9].  Electrophysiological studies have revealed that BLA
neurons are responsive to reward-predictive cues [10].  Inactivation or
lesions of the BLA impairs acquisition of cocaine-seeking behavior and
conditioned place preference (CPP) in rats, demonstrating a critical role
for the BLA during opiate-related learning and memory [9,11].  In addition, the BLA has a critical role in drug-seeking, relapse and also the
extinction of approach behavior to drug-associated cues [9,12].  A
substantial literature indicates that the role of amygdala in processing
rewarding aspects of stimuli may occur via functional relations between
the BLA and the mesoaccumbens dopamine system [12].  In the other
words, mesolimbic dopamine pathway from the ventral tegmental area
to the nucleus accumbens mediates the rewarding eﬀects of opiates and
the BLA is connected anatomically with this pathway [13,14].  The
ventral tegmental area, nucleus accumbens, and BLA form a functionally interconnected network that is critical for processing the primary
⁎ Corresponding author at: Neuroscience Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, P. O.  Box 19615-1178, Tehran, Iran. 
E-mail addresses: Haghparast@yahoo. com, Haghparast@sbmu. ac. ir (A.  Haghparast). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 008
Received 9 May 2017; Received in revised form 28 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 07 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
Z.  Fatahi Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 19–25
rewarding eﬀects of opiates as well as opiate-related memory [11]. 
Indeed, the functional connectivity of the BLA-nucleus accumbens
pathway is necessary for animals to respond on a second order conditioning task with a natural or drug reinforce [10].  Therefore, in this
study, we tried to determine the eﬀects of morphine-CPP or stress alone
to alternate ﬁring rate of BLA neurons.  Then, we estimated the eﬀect of
simultaneous application of stress and morphine-CPP on these alterations.  In other words, we aimed to compare changes in ﬁring rate
during simultaneous application of stress and morphine-CPP than application of morphine or stress alone. 
preference criteria, the time spent in the drug-paired place minus the
time spent in saline-paired place was calculated [15]. 
2. 2. 2.  Forced swim stress
The forced swim stress (FSS) was performed in a Plexiglas tank
(50 cm height × 30 cm diameter) ﬁlled with 35 cm depth of water
(24 ± 27 °C).  Each rat was forced to swim individually for 6 min once
a day.  For induction of acute stress (AS), the animals received FSS for
6 min just one day but, in subchronic stress (SS) groups, the animals
received FSS for 6 min once a day for 3 consecutive days. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Animals
Male Wistar rats (Pasteur Institute, Tehran,
Iran), weighting
230–290 g were used in this study.  The animals were randomly kept in
groups of three with free access to chow and tap water.  The vivarium
was maintained at 12:12 h light/dark cycle and controlled temperature
(23 ± 1 °C).  All procedures were performed according to the Guide for
the care and use of laboratory animals (National Institutes of Health
Publication No.  80-23, revised 1996) and were approved by the
Research and Ethics Committee of Shahid Beheshti University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. 
2. 2.  Behavioral test
2. 2. 1.  Conditioning apparatus and paradigm
The rewarding properties of morphine were investigated using a
CPP paradigm.  Place conditioning boxes were made up of Plexiglas
with two sides (30 cm × 30 cm × 40 cm) which were diﬀerent in
shading and texture.  Compartment A was white with black horizontal
stripes 2 cm wide on its walls and also had a net-like ﬂoor. 
Compartment B was black with vertical white stripes, 2 cm wide with a
smooth ﬂoor.  The third compartment, C, was a red tunnel
(30 cm × 15 cm × 40 cm).  It protruded from the rear of the two other
large compartments and connected their entrances.  In this apparatus,
rats showed no consistent preference for either large compartments (A
and B), which is in support of our unbiased CPP paradigm.  It took place
in the following manner. 
2. 2. 1. 1.  Pre-conditioning phase.  On day 1, each rat was placed
separately into the apparatus for 10 min, with free access to all
in each compartment and the rat’s
compartments.  Time spent
movements and time spent in each compartment were recorded (pretest day).  Animals were then randomly assigned to one of the two
compartments for place conditioning. 
2. 2. 1. 2.  Conditioning phase.  This phase consisted of a 3-day schedule of
conditioning sessions.  The conditioning training was carried out twice a
day each for 30 min with an interval of 6 h for saline- and morphine
(5 mg/kg, morphine sulfate; Temad Co. , Tehran, Iran) pairing in an
alternated morning–afternoon design.  In this phase, animals received
three trials in which they experienced the eﬀects of the drugs while
conﬁned to one compartment for 30 min, and three trials in which they
experienced the eﬀects of
saline while conﬁned to the other
compartment by closing the removable gate. 
2. 2. 1. 3.  Post-conditioning phase.  This phase was carried out on day 5th
(the preference test day).  For testing, the removable wall was raised and
rat could access the entire apparatus for a 10-min period.  The mean
time spent for each rat in both compartments was recorded by a 3CCD
camera (Panasonic Inc. , Japan) and analyzed using the Ethovision
software (Version 7), a video tracking system for automation of
behavioralNetherlands).  In order to calculate the conditioning score as the
Information Technology,
experiments2. 3.  Experimental procedures
Male Wistar rats were divided into two supergroups, saline- and
morphine-treated animals.  Each supergroup consisted of control, acute
stress (AS) and subchronic stress (SS) groups.  All of the groups passed
CPP stages according to the CPP protocol (Electronic supplementary
Fig.  A).  In the morphine-treated animals, the control group was treated
with morphine (5 mg/kg) during the conditioning phase, while the AS
group received morphine during the conditioning phase and also FSS on
the test day (post-conditioning phase) just 10 min before behavioral test
(Electronic supplementary Fig.  B), and in the SS group, animals received FSS during the conditioning phase for 10 min before each
morphine injection during the acquisition period (Electronic supplementary Fig.  C).  In the saline-treated animals, the control group received saline (1 ml/kg) instead of morphine (5 mg/kg) during the
conditioning phase, the AS group received saline during the conditioning phase and FSS on the test day 10 min before the behavioral
test.  The SS group received FSS in a 3-days schedule during the conditioning phase, 10 min before saline injection once a day.  Conditioning
score was calculated for each rat on the test day. 
For the measurement of neural ﬁring rate in the BLA, on the ﬁfth
day after behavioral test (as mentioned above), the neural activity was
measured by in vivo single unit recording for 20 min. 
2. 4.  Electrical recording and data acquisition
Animals were deeply anesthetized with urethane (1. 5 g/kg,
intraperitoneally, with supplemental doses as required; Sigma–Aldrich,
Germany).  Then, tracheotomy was done in order to prevent suﬀocation
and the animals were placed in a stereotaxic instrument (Stoelting;
USA).  The body temperature was preserved for the entire experiment
using a heating pad (Int.  Biomedical Inc. , USA).  Extracellular recording
from individual neurons was obtained with tungsten microelectrode
(shaft diameter 127 μm, tip exposure 1–3 μm, tip impedance 5 MΩ;
Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA).  Microelectrode was stereotaxically
advanced into the BLA (AP = 2. 8 mm, La t = ± 4. 6 mm and
DV = 8. 7 mm) according to rat brain atlas [16].  Spike signals which
were received from neurons by a preampliﬁer, were ampliﬁed by a
diﬀerential ampliﬁer (DAM-80, WPI, USA; ×10000 gain; 300 Hz and
10 kHz for low and high ﬁlters, respectively) and digitalized at 50 kHz
sampling rate and 12-bit voltage resolution using a data acquisition
system (D3109; WSI, Tehran, Iran).  All-or-none spike events were detected using a window discriminator (W3205; WSI, Tehran, Iran) based
on the spike amplitude. 