Article
Nigrotectal Stimulation Stops Interval Timing in Mice
Highlights
d Novel head-ﬁxed timing task allows rapid acquisition of
timing behavior
d Single-trial analysis reveals stepping dynamics and strong
motivational modulation
d Nigrotectal pathway activation delays timing of future
behaviorKoji Toda, Nicholas A.  Lusk,
Glenn D. R.  Watson, . . . , Haofang E.  Li,
Warren H.  Meck, Henry H.  Yin
Correspondence
kt131@duke. edu (K. T. ),
hy43@duke. edu (H. H. Y. )
In Brief
Toda Name design a novel paradigm to
study interval timing in mice.  Using
optogenetic manipulations, the authors
show that activation of the nigrotectal
pathway not only suppresses ongoing
behavior but also delays timing of future
behavior.  These results suggest that
disrupting basal ganglia output can stop
central networks underlying timing. 
Toda Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3763–3770
December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 003
Current BiologyNigrotectal Stimulation
Stops Interval Timing in Mice
Koji Toda,1,2,3,5,* Nicholas A.  Lusk,1,5 Glenn D. R.  Watson,1 Namsoo Kim,1 Dongye Lu,4 Haofang E.  Li,1 Warren H.  Meck,1
and Henry H.  Yin1,4,6,*
1Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
2Human Informatics Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Umezono 1-1-1, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-8568, Japan
3Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Kojimachi 5-3-1, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0083, Japan
4Department of Neurobiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27708, USA
5These authors contributed equally
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: kt131@duke. edu (K. T. ), hy43@duke. edu (H. H. Y. )
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 003Considerable evidence implicates the basal ganglia
in interval timing, yet the underlying mechanisms
remain poorly understood.  Using a novel behavioral
task, we demonstrate that head-ﬁxed mice can be
trained to show the key features of timing behavior
within a few sessions.  Single-trial analysis of licking
behavior reveals stepping dynamics with variable
onset times, which is responsible for the canonical
Gaussian distribution of timing behavior.  Moreover,
the duration of licking bouts decreased as mice
became sated, showing a strong motivational
modulation of licking bout initiation and termination. 
Using optogenetics, we examined the role of the
basal ganglia output in interval timing.  We stimulated a pathway important for licking behavior, the
GABAergic output projections from the substantia
nigra pars reticulata to the deep layers of the superior
colliculus.  We found that stimulation of this pathway
not only cancelled licking but also delayed the initiation of anticipatory licking for the next interval in a
frequency-dependent manner.  By combining quantitative behavioral analysis with optogenetics in the
head-ﬁxed setup, we established a new approach
for studying the neural basis of interval timing. 
INTRODUCTION
Time perception is unique because there are no dedicated sensory organs or receptors for time.  The brain appears to create the
subjective sense of time by integrating a variety of sensory inputs
and internal states [1].  Many studies have implicated corticobasal ganglia networks in interval timing in the seconds to minutes range [2–5].  However, it remains unclear how basal ganglia
output contributes to timing behavior. 
Traditional studies examining interval timing have two major
limitations.  First, the behavioral methods are time consuming
and yield results that are difﬁcult to interpret.  For example,
operant procedures using lever pressing as the behavioral
readout are commonly used across many species [6]. 
Training typically takes months and produces complex stereotyped behaviors between lever presses.  Second, techniques
commonly used in animal timing studies, like lesion, electrical stimulation, and pharmacological manipulations, cannot
precisely manipulate speciﬁc neuronal populations and neuroimaging timing studies in humans rely on correlational
analyses of brain activity and behavioral data [4, 7].  To overcome these limitations, we designed a novel task for studying
interval timing in head-ﬁxed mice during optogenetic manipulation of deﬁned neuronal populations.  Using a ﬁxed time
schedule of reinforcement, we trained mice to exhibit accurate timing behavior within a few hours.  Mice rapidly showed
licking behavior that peaks at the expected time of reward
delivery in accordance with previous studies using lever
presses as a behavioral measure [8, 9]. 