
Alexithymia is a personality trait involving deﬁcits in emotional processing.  The personality construct has been
extensively validated, but the underlying neural and physiological systems remain controversial.  One theory
suggests that low-level somatosensory mechanisms act as somatic markers of emotion, underpinning cognitive
and aﬀective impairments in alexithymia.  In two separate samples (total N = 100), we used an established
Quantitative Sensory Testing (QST) battery to probe multiple neurophysiological submodalities of somatosensation, and investigated their associations with the widely-used Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20). 
Experiment one found reduced sensitivity to warmth in people with higher alexithymia scores, compared to
individuals with lower scores, without deﬁcits in other somatosensory submodalities.  Experiment two replicated
this result in a new group of participants using a full-sample correlation between threshold for warm detection
and TAS-20 scores.  We discuss the relations between low-level thermoceptive function and cognitive processing
of emotion. 
Alexithymia is a multifaceted personality construct, expressed with
varying intensity in the general population.  Self-report measures like
the Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS) (Bagby, Parker, & Taylor, 1994),
the most widely used and well-validated assessment tool (Bagby Name,
1994; Parker, Michael Bagby, Taylor, Endler, & Schmitz, 2003) characterise alexithymia through three main facets: diﬃculties in identifying feelings (DIF), diﬃculties in describing feelings (DDF), and externally-oriented thinking or a preoccupation with the details of
external events (EOT).  Dimensional analysis suggest alexithymia comprises an aﬀective dimension, involving emotionalizing, and fantasizing, and a cognitive dimension, involving identifying, diﬀerentiatingBruce, Martens,
Aleman, & Hooker, 2014; Herbert, Herbert, & Pollatos, 2011; Parker,
Keefer, Taylor, & Bagby, 2008; Taylor, Bagby, & Parker, 1991).  Importantly, people with high levels of alexithymia exhibit diﬃculties not
only in processing their own emotions, but also in processing the
emotions
Borgomaneri,
Làdavas, & Bertini, 2016; Jessimer & Markham, 1997; Parker Name,Di
Prkachin, & Prkachin,
Scarpazza,
expressed
describing
feelings
(Goerlich-Dobre,by(Borhani,Pellegrino, & Làdavas, 2014; Sifneos, 1973).  Thus, alexithymic individuals show altered recognition of emotional stimuli (Grynberg
Name, 2012; Ihme Name, 2014) and decreased activation of the amygdala during presentation of emotional stimuli (Jongen Name, 2014;
Moriguchi & Komaki, 2013), and particularly negative stimuli (Kugel
Name, 2008; Pouga, Berthoz, de Gelder, & Grezes, 2010; Reker Name,
2010; for a recent metaanalysis: van der Velde Name, 2013). 
The relation between alexithymic traits and speciﬁc neural systems
or pathways remains controversial.  The multiple somatosensory pathways that transmit interoceptive, proprioceptive, mechanoreceptive
and nociceptive information to the CNS are a plausible candidate.  The
view of emotions as linked to bodily states, or ‘somatic markers’ has
long been popular (Damasio. , 1999; Damasio, Everitt, & Bishop, 1996;
James, 1890).  Indeed, emotion-speciﬁc responses have been reported in
primary somatosensory cortex (Sel, Forster, & Calvo-Merino, 2014). 
Such theories suggest that alexithymia might involve abnormalities of
somatosensory or autonomic processing.  Disruption in regulation of
emotions in alexithymia, particularly negative emotions, is thought to
result in chronic sympathetic hyperarousal, high sensitivity to painful
stimulation, somatosensory ampliﬁcation (the tendency to experience
mild somatic sensations as intense, noxious, and disturbing – Barsky,
⁎ Corresponding author at: Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 17 Queen Square, London WC1N 3AZ, UK. 
E-mail address: p. haggard@ucl. ac. uk (P.  Haggard). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 012
Received 3 January 2017; Received in revised form 16 July 2017; Accepted 16 July 2017
Available online 20 July 2017
0301-0511/ © 2017 The Authors.  Published by Elsevier B. V.  This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons. org/licenses/BY/4. 0/). 
K.  Borhani Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 132–140tvtsedarcamhieaeweniaercvtspncigSiptotlmtlcrcllfiPSS(lcsnpctaytaHotlmtlrcininticnlcttvtsedaiytxlsrcSSda2AnetbeweniaercotlroeiioeiiotaﬁnitaﬁniydcdiotselrcifgiscrnaBAS2A:toefesurlrncniasctmshyPtaiirphle115sehenVnḱčly)02)02. aeaa)02. aenKodacmhieaeweenrﬀdtrvsipncigsipttvtsedaiytxlnetbotlrNNranisunalic0_AyintiiPA:rprtoefefenataglmocnrctwtetPersdiprftmstwtetP95)91rlnKndalM49(ltxCcmhiealhehnadaiytxlnetbotlrNlarhdalaiacmodosrtotee,sveamlbtwtetPaornieoatwtetP769(ltnaZdttvtseeosASndaiytxlnetbotiostaﬁniamhieaeweniaercncigsNNlmttaalnterseplctcaeonaSSSTsrprlSipeunsnpctaytaHipnnianniohhisniasnpctaytaH46100(20(l. aeergrnscJ3579LatHiodvaotmgicagiudtvtarmrwnienabrseoaoseilnioenhtWtaiirphle1)02. aeosrK1eosASn0STeweniaercvtspncigSotcipArseoao0STsrprlStetpitics1149(ltei. slsRotmanmrpEtaiirPredarhuo. iytxlngiscryonstmsnsedaedtykoemnszrmu1lagiscryonstmsaiyatiytxlgiaesiuS
Hamaguchi,2007;
Yanai, & Fukudo,
Goodson, Lane, & Cleary, 1988) and complaints of physical symptomsLumley,
Stettner, & Wehmer, 1996).  Brain regions previously associated with
somatosensory processing,
including the insula and somatosensory
cortices (Dijkerman & De Haan, 2007; Iwamura, 1998) were hypothesised to be overactive during emotional processing in alexithymia, potentially explaining the tendency to experience physical symptoms
when emotionally aroused (Karlsson, Näätänen, & Stenman, 2008). 
However other studies failed to ﬁnd associations between somatosensory ampliﬁcation and alexithymia (Gregory, Manring, & Berry, 2000;
Kosturek, Gregory, Sousou, & Trief, 1998; Lesser, Koehle, & Lueders,
1979).  Moreover, the frequent comorbidity of alexithymia with several
psychiatric disorders may contribute to such discrepancies.  For instance, while Nyklı́ček and Vingerhoets (2000) reported hypersensitivity for pain and touch in alexithymia, de Zwaan, Biener, Bach,
Wiesnagrotzki, and Stacher (1996) failed to ﬁnd any association between the degree of alexithymia and thermally and mechanically induced pain thresholds, in a group of eating disorder patients with
alexithymia (de Zwaan Name, 1996).  Table 1. 
This summary shows a high heterogeneity of both methods and
conclusions in previous research.  Indeed, existing accounts make conﬂicting predictions about the direction of any putative association between alexithymia and somatosensation.  On the one hand, somatosensory cortical areas (e. g.  right primary and secondary somatosensory
areas and the insula) are positively activated during emotion recognition in healthy volunteers (Adolphs, 2002), suggesting that high alexithymia might be associated with reduced somatosensory processing.  On
the other hand, the somatosensory ampliﬁcation concept predicts increased somatosensory processing at least for some somatosensory
modalities such as pain, and visceral sensation (Barsky Name, 1988;
Ihme Name, 2014; Kano Name, 2007; Perez, Barsky, Vago,
Baslet, & Silbersweig, 2015). 
Detailed understanding of relations between alexithymia and somatosensory processing has been hampered by the lack of psychophysiologically-validated measures of somatosensory processing in the
alexithymia literature.  Somatosensory systems can be divided into
several submodalities, each reﬂecting a distinct class of stimulus energy, peripheral receptor, aﬀerent pathways and cortical target.  Within
thermoception, for example, warm and cold sensations are mediated by
diﬀerent aﬀerent ﬁbres, and are therefore considered distinct submodalities.  Some somatosensory submodalities, such as mechanoreceptive light touch, are classically interpreted as exteroceptive,
while others, such as visceral baroreception, are considered interoceptive.  The theoretical and empirical confusion over somatosensory
processing in alexithymia may arise partly from lack of a systematic
experimental approach to measuring somatosensation itself.  Few studies of alexithymia have taken account of modern psychophysiological
approaches to pathway-speciﬁc somatosensory perception, and few
have tested multiple somatosensory submodalities.  Thus, the existence
and speciﬁcity of any link between somatosensory processing and
alexithymia remains unclear. 
We therefore performed two studies relating alexithymia scores to
performance on established psychophysiological quantitative sensory
testing (QST) battery (Rolke, Baron Name, 2006).  QST involves multiple
psychophysical tests, assessing the neurophysiological function of the
major somatosensory aﬀerent ﬁbre pathways from the skin (Hansson,
Backonja, & Bouhassira, 2007).  QST is widely used in neurology, and
extensive normative data are available (Rolke, Baron Name, 2006;
Rolke, Magerl Name, 2006).  Importantly, each QST subtest focuses on a
speciﬁc somatosensory submodality, so QST has potentially high sensitivity to identify selective deﬁcits in speciﬁc neurophysiological
pathways.  We used the following QST subtests: warm threshold, cold
threshold, pinprick radiant heat pain threshold, and somatosensory
detection.  These tests are thought to involve the following aﬀerent
pathways respectively: somatosensory detection – Aβ primarily, but
potentially also Aδ and C-ﬁbres; warm – C-ﬁbre; cold – Aδ-ﬁbre –K.  Borhani Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 132–140
(thought
interoceptive awareness
pinprick radiant heat pain- Aδ ﬁbres.  In the latter case, our methods
(see later) set the stimulus intensity above the Aδ threshold, which
reliably produces a distinctive pinprick sensation.  However, there is
inevitably a concurrent activation of lower-threshold C-ﬁbres signaling
innocuous warmth. 
In addition, we included established tests of tactile acuity (Aβﬁbre),
to depend on mechanosensitive receptors innervated by vagal aﬀerent ﬁbres in the atria and
venoatrial
junction, or mechanosensitive C-ﬁbres in the ventricles
(Longhust, 2004; Malliani, Lombardi, & Pagani, 1986), by intra-thoracic
detection of the force generated by changing blood-pressure on the
walls of the great vessels in surrounding mechanosensitive thoracic
tissues (Eichler and Katkin, 1994; ; Schandry Name, 1993), and possibly
also by cutaneous mechanosensitive ﬁbres overlying large arteries
(Critchley, Wiens, Rotshtein, Öhman, & Dolan, 2004; Khalsa, Rudrauf,
Sandesara, Olshansky, & Tranel, 2009)), and aﬀective touch (presumed
C-tactile mechanoreceptor pathway McGlone, Wessberg, & Olausson,
2014, though concurrent activation of Aβ cannot be avoided).  These
tests are not part of classical QST, but involve a degree of psychophysiological speciﬁcity, and which have previously been linked to alexithymia.  We hypothesised that if emotion recognition impairment in
alexithymia has a somatosensory grounding, this should be revealed by
an association between TAS scores and performance on one or more
subtests of QST.  Based on previous results, we predicted that any such
association would involve the ‘protopathic’, small-ﬁbre submodalities
that participate in conveying somatic states, rather than the ‘epicritic’,
large-ﬁbre submodalities that participate in somatosensory exteroception. 
<Middle> Experiment. 
2. 1.  Methods
2. 1. 1.  Participants
In the absence of previous similar studies, we were interested in
whether a strong association between somatosensory processing and
alexithymia existed, so we based our a priori power calculation on a
relatively large assumed eﬀect size (0. 90).  A power calculation in
G*Power 3. 1 (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & Buchner, 2007) indicated that 40
participants would achieve a power of approximately 0. 80 in a twotailed between-groups independent t-test. 
189 volunteers (ﬁfty one males, mean age = 23. 7, range:18–40)
ﬁlled out the 20-item Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20; Taylor,
Bagby, & Parker, 2003) online.  TAS scores range from 20 to 100.  Scores
of 61 or higher were considered as high alexithymia, while scores of 36
or lower were considered as low alexithymia (Taylor, Ryan, & Bagby,
1985).  For experiment 1, 20 healthy Individuals with high TAS-20 totals (six males, mean age = 24. 65, range: 19–35) and 20 with low TAS20 totals (six males, mean age = 25. 7, range:19–40) TAS-20 totals were
selected, using the cutoﬀs deﬁned above, in order to obtain an experimental sample varying widely in levels of the alexithymia trait.  The
20 low alexithymia (LA) participants had a TAS mean score of 31. 05
(SD = 3. 18, range: 25–35, corresponding to the lower TAS quartile
reported in the general population (Taylor Name, 1985), while the 20
high alexithymia (HA) participants had a TAS mean score of 66. 2
(SD = 5. 69, range: 61–77, corresponding to the upper TAS quartile
reported in the general population). 
In addition, the alexithymia
module of the structured interview for the Diagnostic Criteria for Psychosomatic Research (DCPR) (Mangelli, Semprini, Sirri, Fava, & Sonino,
2006; Porcelli & Rafanelli, 2010; Porcelli & Sonino, 2007) was also used
to conﬁrm the presence or absence of alexithymia.  At least 3 of 6
characteristics in this interview must be present
for alexithymia
(Porcelli & Rafanelli, 2010).  (LA:1. 6, SD = 0. 5, range:1–2;, HA:4. 6,
SD = 1. 14, range:3–6).  Participants were included in the study if i) they
had no history of neurological, major medical or psychiatric disorder
and ii) their scores on the TAS-20 and the DCPR were congruent(congruency was deﬁned as both scores on TAS20 and DCPR had to
indicate the same level of alexithymia.  For instance, to be considered in
high alexithymia group the score in TAS-20 had to be 61 or higher, and
DCPR score had to be 3 or higher).  No participant was excluded due to
discrepancy between TAS-20 and DCPR score.  Two participants were
excluded after completing the TAS online, but prior to experimental
testing, due to self-reported previous history of neurological or psychiatric disorder. 
Experimental data were obtained from the 40 included healthy
participants in a comprehensive standardized QST protocol consisting
of 7 tests: cold and warm thermal perception thresholds, pinprick pain
threshold, tactile acuity, aﬀective touch, interceptive awareness, and
somatosensory signal detection.  All participants performed the tests in
the same, stated order.  Fixed order testing was necessary for technical
reasons, and to avoid possible interactions between speciﬁc modalities
and those tested subsequently (Gröne Name, 2012).  For instance, it has
been found that applying thermal stimulation before mechanical stimuli might lead to mechanical pain sensitivity (Gröne Name, 2012).  The
whole experiment took about two hours and a half.  Participants provided written informed consent prior to the experiment and were paid
£7. 50 per h.  The experiment was approved by the UCL Research Ethics
Committee, and carried out in accordance with the provisions of the
Declaration of Helsinki. Sprecher,
Zaslansky, & Hemli,
2. 1. 1. 1.  Thermal detection threshold test.  Contact thermal stimuli were
delivered to the back of the left hand using a 13 mm circular diameter
Peltier-type thermode (NTE-2A, Physitemp Instruments Inc).  Contact
warm and cold threshold was estimated by the method of limits
(Yarnitsky,temperature was ﬁxed for a random time between 28 and 30 s, an
initial level of 32 °C, and then ramped up or down by 2 °C/s.  To avoid
possible pain and tissue damage, maximum temperature was limited to
50 °C and minimum temperature was limited to 14 °C.  Participants
were asked to press a button using their right hand as soon as they felt
any change in temperature, and then report the direction of the change,
whether the stimulus got colder or warmer.  Three cold and three warm
stimulus ramps were delivered in random order.  The three trials were
averaged to obtain a warm threshold and a cold threshold
measurement.  Interstimulus intervals were 20 s. The ﬁbre classes investigated by these tests are diﬀerent.  The warm
threshold test was designed to investigate the small-diameter C ﬁbres
associated with innocuous warm perception, while the cold threshold
test was designed to investigate the larger-diameter Aδ-ﬁbres associated
with cold perception. 
staircases. 
2. 1. 1. 2.  Pinprick pain threshold and discrimination task.  Noxious radiant
heat stimulation was delivered by an infrared CO2 laser stimulation
device with a wavelength of 10. 6 μm (SIFEC, Ferrières, Belgium).  The
laser pulse (100 ms duration) was transmitted via an optic ﬁbre to reach
a spot diameter of 6 mm on the dorsum of participants’ left hand.  These
laser pulses selectively excite Aδ- and small C-ﬁbres, but do not coactivate the Aβ-ﬁbres associated with mechanoreceptors.  For each
participant, we identiﬁed the Aδ threshold for ‘pinprick pain’ using
ascending-descending-ascending
threshold was
identiﬁed by ﬁnding the lowest skin temperature that elicited both a
report of “pinprick sensation”, and a reaction time (RT) < 650 ms
2012; Mouraux,
(Churyukanov,
Guerit, & Plaghki, 2003).  Starting at 38 °C,
the temperature was
increased in steps of 4 °C until RT was less than 650 ms.  Then the
temperature was decreased in steps of 2 °C until the RT became longer
than 650 ms.  Finally, the temperature was increased in steps of 1 °C
until RT was less than 650 ms again, and the participant reported a
pinprick sensation for 3 consecutive repetitions of
the same
temperature.  To estimate nociceptive discrimination, we then set a
low stimulus intensity at 2 °C above pinprick threshold, and the high
stimulus intensity at 8 °C above pinprick threshold.  Participants were
Legrain, & Mouraux,
Plaghki,K.  Borhani Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 132–140analysis
familiarized with the high and low levels of stimulation, and received
some discrimination practice trials.  Then they performed a forcedchoice task in which they received 30 low and 30 high intensity stimuli,
randomly interleaved with a random 10–15 s interstimulus interval. 
After each set of ﬁfteen stimuli there was a 5 min pause to prevent
habituation to painful stimuli.  The participants were required to
identify pinprick pain as ‘high’ or ‘low’.  Their reports in the task were
recast as attempts to detect the high intensity stimuli, so that the results
could be analysed using signal detection analysis (Green & Swets, 1966;
Macmillan & Creelman, 1991).  This
independent
estimates of nociceptive perceptual sensitivity and response bias.  We
considered the number of hits for high intensity level of noxious or
electro-tactile stimulus (number of high intensity stimulus trials in
which participants responded ‘high’), false alarms (number of low
intensity stimulus trials in which participants responded ‘high’).  Hit
rates [P(‘high’ response | high intensity stimulus), proportion of hit
trials to which subject responded ‘high’] and false alarm rates [P(‘high’
response | low intensity stimulus), proportion of trials in which low
intensity stimuli were reported as ‘high’] were calculated.  These were
used to obtain the perceptual sensitivity (d’) in detecting the high
intensity stimulus.  D’ does not require homogeneous variance and can
be calculated using a standard correction and adjustment even if the hit
or false alarm rates are 1 or 0)
(Macmillan & Creelman, 1991;
Stanislaw & Todorov, 1999).  The tendency to report stimuli as ‘high’,
irrespective of actual intensity, (C, response bias) was also obtained. 
Sensitivity and response bias were calculated for high intensity noxious
and electro-tactile stimuli. 
2. 1. 1. 3.  Tactile acuity test.  The Grating Orientation Test (GOT; Van
Boven & Johnson, 1994) consists of a series of square wave gratings
with graded spatial frequencies, and 50% duty cycle.  It was used to
measure each participant’s grating orientation discrimination threshold
– an established test that probes light touch receptors and the associated
large-diameter Aβ ﬁbres.  Beginning with the largest ridge width (3 mm)
the experimenter applied the grating to the participant’s index ﬁngertip
while they were blindfolded.  Each grating was presented three times for
approximately 0. 5 s, randomly changing the orientation, so the ridges
could run either along or across the axis of the index ﬁnger.  Participants
made unspeeded verbal
regarding the
orientation of the gratings, responding “along” or “across” the ﬁnger. 
If all three trials were perceived correctly, the next lowest ridge width
was used.  This procedure continued with gratings of decreasing ridge
width until the participant made at least one error (i. e. , accuracy of
66. 6% or less over three trials).  The ridge width was then increased
again until the participant answered correctly on 100% of three trials. 
This ridge width was then used as the participant’s threshold.  The
whole procedure repeated 3 times and results were averaged to obtain a
single threshold score. 
forced-choice judgments
2. 1. 1. 4.  Aﬀective touch (putative C tactile system).  Participants sat at a
table with their left forearm resting palm-up.  Three tactile stroking
stimuli at velocities of 0. 3, 3, 30 cm/s were delivered over a 10 cm
distance.  The stimuli were delivered either by experimenter’s index,
middle and ring ﬁnger or by three joined paintbrushes (Daler Rowney
Oval Wash Brush size 1/2) positioned to form the same shape as the
experimenters’ ﬁngers, and moved by a robot (Phantom premium 1. 0). 
Stimuli were blocked across the type of agent (experimenter or robot). 
Inside each block, stimulus speed was randomised.  Each speed repeated
twice.  The interstimulus interval was 30 s to minimize receptor fatigue. 
To keep stimulation duration constant, 1 stroke at 0. 3 cm/s, or 10
consecutive strokes at 3 cm/s or 100 strokes at 30 cm/s was applied, as
in previous studies (e. g.  Gentsch, Panagiotopoulou, & Fotopoulou,The
experimenter was trained to apply stroking similarly to the robot. 
Following each stroke the participants were instructed to rate the
pleasantness and softness of stimulus using two separately-presented
Löken, Wessberg, McGlone, & Olausson,to pleasant
paper and pencil visual analog scales (VAS), with the endpoints
(− 10 to 10).  Prior to the experiment
unpleasant
participants were familiarized with one trial for each stimulus with
diﬀerent velocity and delivered by either the experimenter or robot. 
Previous studies have shown an “inverted U-shaped” relationship
between brushing velocity and ﬁring rate in C-tactile aﬀerents, with
highest responses to 3 cm/s stroking.  Further, this velocity range was
also perceived as more pleasant
than faster or slower stroking,
suggesting an aﬀective role for these aﬀerents (Bessou, Burgess,
Perl, & Taylor, 1971; Löken Name, 2009).  Faster (30 cm/s) and slower
(0. 3 cm/s) velocities were included were used to control for arousal and
number of strokes associated with C-tactile suboptimal velocities versus
the optimal velocity.  Importantly, therefore, any potential diﬀerences
in aﬀective touch processing between groups
should show an
interaction between group and stroking velocity, with the prominent
diﬀerence between groups being at 3 cm/s. 
This test is thought to probe a speciﬁc neural pathway for aﬀective
touch system which is mediated by small unmyelinated C-Tactile mechanoreceptors (CT) – though concurrent activation of Aβ mechanoreceptors cannot be avoided. 
2. 1. 1. 5.  Interoceptive sensitivity.  The Heartbeat Perception Task was
used as a measure of interoceptive sensitivity (ISt). The ECG was
measured through nonpolarizable Ag-AgCl electrodes attached to the
left ulna styloid process, and right wrist and referenced to the right
radial styloid process.  Signals were recorded by a BioSemi ampliﬁer
system (BioSemi, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).  A sampling rate of
1000 Hz was used.  R-waves were detected online and were stored on a
trigger channel.  The heartbeat perception task was performed
according to the Mental Tracking Method proposed by Schandry
(1981), using three intervals of 25, 45, and 60 s.  The three perception
intervals were separated by standard resting periods (30 s).  Participants
sat on a chair and were asked to close their eyes and silently count their
heartbeats by concentrating on their heart activity.  During heartbeat
counting, participants were not permitted to take their pulse or to
attempt any other physical manipulations that could facilitate the
detection of heartbeats.  Following the stop signal, participants were
asked to verbally report the number of counted heartbeats.  The
participants were not informed about the lengths of the counting
phases or about the quality of their performance.  ISt was measured as
a heartbeat perception score, calculated by taking the mean score
across the three heartbeat perception intervals according to the
following transformation: 1/3 Σ(1-(|recorded heartbeats – counted
heartbeats|)/recorded heartbeats).  The heartbeat perception score
varies between 0 and 1.  The maximum score of 1 indicates absolute
accuracy of heartbeat perception.  This heartbeat detection task is
widely used to assess interoceptive sensitivity (Dunn, Dalgleish,
Ogilvie, & Lawrence, 2007; Herbert, Pollatos, & Schandry, 2007). has good test-retest reliability, and correlates highly with other
heartbeat detection tasks (Knoll and Hodapp, 1992).  Previous studies
provided contrary results regarding the relation between ISt and
alexithymia.  While some studies reported a negative correlation
between ISt and alexithymic trait (Herbert Name, 2011; Shah, Hall,
Catmur, & Bird, 2016), another showed a positive correlation (Ernst
Name, 2013)
2. 1. 1. 6.  Somatosensory detection test.  To assess the somatosensory
detection threshold electrocutaneous
stimulation was used.  This
potentially activates all the ﬁbres having receptors in the stimulated
skin region (large Aβ ﬁbres subserving touch, Aδ ﬁbres subserving fast
pain, and small-diameter unmyelinated ﬁbres subserving temperature). 
At the detection threshold intensities used here, however, nociceptive
ﬁbres were unlikely to be activated, and Aβ ﬁbres probably contribute
most to perceptual performance.  Tactile stimulation with a duration of
10 ms was delivered using a Digitimer DS5 constant current stimulator
(Digitimer Ltd. , Welwyn Garden City, UK) connected to a pair ofK.  Borhani Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 132–140
disposable press-stud electrodes (Biosense Medical, Chelmsford, UK)
placed on dorsum of the left hand. 
Electro-tactile stimulation was used to determine each participant’s
detection threshold.  Starting at 0. 5 mA, the current was increased in
steps of 0. 5 mA until the participant detected the stimulus.  The current
was then reduced in 0. 5 mA steps until the stimulus was no longer
detected, and then increased again until the stimulus was again perceived.  This last value was taken as the detection threshold.  Next, the
current was increased rapidly to near-pain threshold, and then the same
procedure was used to measure the participant’s pain threshold.  The
low and high levels of stimulation for the main experiment were then
set to 45% and 55%, respectively, of the range between the detection
and pain thresholds.  These levels were chosen based on a pilot study in
a separate group of volunteers which indicated that this diﬀerence
between high and low electro-tactile intensities would approximately
match the discrimination performance used in the test of nociceptive
discrimination between high and low laser heat-pain stimuli.  The mean
diﬀerence between the high and low intensities was 1. 05 mA
(range = 0. 55–1. 15 mA).  Participants were familiarized with the high
and low levels of stimulation.  Then they performed a forced-choice task
in which they received 80 (40 high stimulus intensity) randomly delivered stimuli.  Inter stimuli interval was randomised between 8–10 s. 
Participants were asked to discriminate whether the perceived stimulus
was high or low stimulus intensity, and respond with the keyboard.  SDT
was used to obtain independent estimates of perceptual sensitivity and
response bias as described for pinprick radiant heat pain stimulus. 
2. 2.  Results
We found no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the high alexithymia
and low alexithymia groups in cold detection, pinprick radiant heat
pain threshold, somatosensory detection, tactile acuity detection, affective touch (Fig.  1), (see Supplementary Tables S1a, S1b, S2a, S2b,
and Fig. 