
Although morphine is a considerably eﬀective and extensive use of
therapy for clinical pain, chronic use of morphine generally leads to
physical and psychological dependence [1,2].  It is well known that
activation of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA)
by long-term use of opioids leads to the increase of dopamine release
into the nucleus accumbens (NAc), which is thought to play an important role in opioid reward [3].  Accumulating evidence showed that
acute and chronic treatment with morphine induced a central proinﬂammatory response that contributes to the development of morphine
addiction-related behavior [4].  Morphine-induced neuroinﬂammation
is evidenced by the existence of glial cell activation and proinﬂammatory cytokines release in CNS [5].  Inhibition of glial cell activation in NAc prevented morphine-induced reward eﬀect [6].  Similarly,
cytokines such as TNF-α or IL-6 in CNS are also emerging as the important modulators of addiction-related behavior [7,8].  These results
suggested that inﬂammatory responses in VTA or NAc played an important role in the reward eﬀect of morphine.  Notably, recently studies
showed that opioid via acting on the TLR4 receptor contributed to the
various opioid eﬀects including hyperalgesia, tolerance and dependence [9].  Peer's study further revealed that the binding between
morphine and TLR4/MD2 was also involved in the reward eﬀect of
morphine, while knockout of TLR4 suppressed opioid-induced conditioned place preference [10].  Currently, whether the TLR4 in VTA
participated in the acquisition and maintenance of reward eﬀect following morphine treatment is unclear. 
Accumulating evidences indicated that upregulation of proinﬂammatory cytokine following morphine treatment might result from
the activation of several intracellular signaling pathways [11].  Among
these signaling pathways, Signal Transducers and Transcription Activator 3 (STAT3) pathway is involved in multiple pathophysiological
process of CNS [12].  It has been reported that activation of STAT3 (pSTAT3) in VTA plays a critical role for the integration of motivated
⁎ Corresponding author at: School of Health Management, Guangzhou Medical University, 195 Dongfeng West Road, Guangzhou, 510182, PR China. 
E-mail address: gzzxq2005@126. com (X. -Q.  Zhang). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 022
Received 19 January 2017; Received in revised form 19 June 2017; Accepted 14 August 2017
Available online 18 August 2017
0166-4328/ © 2017 Published by Elsevier B. V. 
J. -X.  Chen Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 151–157
behavior [13], rewarding eﬀects of running and food intake [14,15]. 
However, it remains unknown whether STAT3 signaling pathway in
VTA contributes to the acquisition and maintenance of morphine reward eﬀect.  Additionally, STAT3, as a major mediator of signaling
during immune responses, is involved in multiple steps in adaptive
immune responses [16,17].  Whether the innate immune pattern-recognition receptor TLR4 via activation of STAT3 mediates the acquisition and maintenance of morphine-induced place preference is unclear. 
<Middle> 2.  Material and methods
2. 1.  Animals and drugs
Male Sprague Dawley rats weighing 250–300 g were obtained from
the Institute of Experimental Animals of Sun Yat-Sen University.  Mice
used in this study were adult male animals on a C57BL/6 background
(weight 20–30 g).  STAT3ﬂox/ﬂoxmice (ID: 016923) were purchased from
the Jackson Laboratory.  All animals were housed in separated cages
and the room was kept at 24 °C temperature and 50–60% humidity,
under a 12/12 h light/dark cycle with ad libitum access to food and
water.  All experimental procedures were approved by the Local Animal
Care Committee and were carried out in accordance with the guidelines
of the National Institutes of Health on animal care and the ethical
guidelines.  All eﬀorts were made to minimize the number of animals
used and their suﬀering. 
Morphine hydrochloride (7. 5 mg/kg, Qing-hai Pharmaceutical
Factory, Xining, China), TLR4 antagonist LPS-RS (Sigma, USA), STAT3
activity antagonist S3I-201 (Selleckchem, USA), and all other chemicals
were commercially obtained.  The antagonists were ﬁrst dissolved in
DMSO to make a stock solution and were subsequently diluted with
saline to a ﬁnal concentration and the ﬁnal concentration of DMSO was
2%.  The vehicle group received the equal concentration of DMSO correspondence to the each group.  All of the antibodies were obtained
from Cell Signaling Technology Co.  (USA), Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Inc.  (USA) or Abcam Ltd.  (USA). 
2. 2.  Injection of adenovirus-associated vector (AAV)
Recombinant adeno-associated virus encoding Cre and GFP marker
(AAV8-Cre-GFP) and AAV encoding GFP (AAV8-GFP) were purchased
from Beijing Vector Gene Technology Company Ltd.  0. 5 μl AAV8-CreGFP was bilateral microinjected into VTA area of STAT3ﬂox/ﬂox mice at
rate of 0. 1 μl/min under the control of a micro-infusion pump.  Injector
glass needles remained in place for 4 ∼ 5 min before being pulled out
to allow the AAV to completely diﬀuse from the tips.  The stereotaxic
coordinates for VTA of mouse were as follows: AP: −3. 44 mm;
ML: ± 1. 1 mm; DV: −4. 6 mm; angle 10° (Paxinos & Franklin, 2001). 
The animals in the control group were injected with the same amount of
AAV encoding GFP (AAV8-GFP).  Morphine was subcutaneously injection on days 21 after the virus injection. 
2. 3.  Surgery and infusion procedures
The rats were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg,
i. p. ), and permanent guide cannulas (23 gauge) were implanted bilaterally 1 mm above VTA.  The stereotaxic coordinates for VTA was as
follows: AP −5. 04 mm; ML ± 2. 2 mm; DV −8. 2 mm; angle 10° respectively [18].  The cannula was secured by dental cement and anchored to stainless steel screws ﬁxed to the skull.  To prevent clogging
and infection, a stainless steel obturator was inserted into the guide
cannula.  The animals were allowed to recover from surgery for 6 days. 
Infusion were performed with a Hamilton syringe connected to a 30gauge injector (WRD), which was terminated 1 mm below the tip of the
guide cannula.  The drugs were bilaterally infused into VTA over a 60-s
period.  The injection needle was kept in place for 60 s to allow the
drugs to completely diﬀuse from the tips, and then the obturator was
reinserted into the guide cannula [19].  A total of 17 animals were excluded from the ﬁnal analysis due to the misplaced cannulas. 
2. 4.  Conditioned place preferences
The CPP apparatus was used as previously described [6,20].  Brieﬂy,
the test apparatus consisted of a shuttle-box that was divided into two
compartments of same size (30 × 30 × 53 cm3) by a central partition
(1 cm thick) with a door.  One compartment was white with a grid ﬂoor
and the other compartment was black with a smooth ﬂoor.  To minimize
the eﬀect of novelty and stress associated with exposure to the apparatus during morphine CPP, rats were habituated to the apparatus for
15 min for three consecutive days before the pre-conditioning test.  In
the pre-conditioning test (day 0), animals were placed in the white
compartment (non-preferred side) of CPP apparatus and the door was
removed to allow animals with free access to both chambers for 15 min. 
The time spent in each compartment was recorded.  In our experiment,
most of rats exhibited natural preference for the black compartment
(preferred side).  Therefore, we used a biased procedure and selected the
white compartment (non-preferred side) as the morphine-paired side
and the black compartment as the saline-paired side.  The animals
showing strong unconditioned preference (> 800 s) were discarded. 
During conditioning (day 1–5), rats were ﬁrstly injected with saline
subcutaneously in the morning and immediately conﬁned to the black
compartment for 30 min; about 6 h later, the rats were subcutaneously
injected with morphine and immediately placed in the white compartment for 30 min.  On the next day, the animals received morphine
administration in the morning and saline injection in the afternoon.  On
the third and ﬁfth day of conditioning, the same schedule as the ﬁrst
day was repeated.  The schedule on the fourth day was same as that of
the second day.  For the CPP test on day 6, rats were placed in the white
compartment and allowed to move freely between both compartments
for 15 min.  The time spent in the white compartment was recorded for
each animal, and the change of preference was calculated as the difference (in s) of the time spent in the drug-paired compartment (white
compartment) between the postconditioning day and the preconditioning session. 
2. 4. 1.  Acquisition experiment
LPS-RS (0. 1, 0. 5 or 1 μg/μl/side) or S3I-201 (1, 10 or 50 nm/μl/
side) was injected into the VTA 30 min prior to each morphine administration during conditioning.  CPP was evaluated on day 6 of the
experiment as indicated in Fig.  1 (CPP Test 1).  To exclude the potential
eﬀect of inhibitors themselves on the conditioning, LPS-RS or S3I-201
alone was micro-injected into the VTA in the animals conditioned with2. 4. 2.  Expression experiment
Following the acquisition of CPP, the rats received a single intraVTA injection of LPS-RS (0. 5 μg/μl/side) or S3I-201 (10 nm/μl/side) in
Fig 1.  Experimental schedule for the morphine-induced conditioned place preference
task.  Time spent in the white compartments was counted pre-experiment (day 0) for all
groups.  Following 5 days of morphine conditioning phase, CPP was valued on day 6 by
subtracting the time spent in the white compartments post morphine treatment from pre
morphine treatment (CPP Test 1).  To investigate the maintenance of morphine CPP, rats
were returned to home cages for 5 days following CPP induction and the behavioral test
was conducted on day 11. 