Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 98–104
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biological Psychology
journal homepage: www. elsevier. com/locate/biopsycho
Interaction between prenatal risk and infant parasympathetic and
sympathetic stress reactivity predicts early aggression
J.  Suurlanda,b,⁎, K. B.  van der Heijdena,b, S. C. J.  Huijbregtsa,b, S. H. M.  van Goozena,c, H.  Swaaba,ba Department of Clinical Child and Adolescent Studies, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
b Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
c School of Psychology, Cardiﬀ University, Cardiﬀ, United Kingdom
A R T I C L E I N F O
A B S T R A C T
Keywords:
Aggression
Stress reactivity
Autonomic nervous system
Prenatal riskNonreciprocal action of the parasympathetic (PNS) and sympathetic (SNS) nervous systems, increases susceptibility to emotional and behavioral problems in children exposed to adversity.  Little is known about the PNS and
SNS in interaction with early adversity during infancy.  Yet this is when the physiological systems involved in
emotion regulation are emerging and presumably most responsive to environmental inﬂuences.  We examined
whether parasympathetic respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) and sympathetic pre-ejection period (PEP) response and recovery at six months, moderate the association between cumulative prenatal risk and physical
aggression at 20 months (N = 113).  Prenatal risk predicted physical aggression, but only in infants exhibiting
coactivation of PNS and SNS (i. e. , increase in RSA and decrease in PEP) in response to stress.  These ﬁndings
indicate that coactivation of the PNS and SNS in combination with prenatal risk is a biological marker for the
development of aggression. andbiological
Exposure to adversity during the prenatal period, such as maternal
psychiatric problems, substance (ab)use, single parenthood and poverty, has been shown to predict aggression in childhood that persists
into adolescence
and adulthood (Côté, Vaillancourt, LeBlanc,
Nagin, & Tremblay, 2006; Hay Name, 2011; NICHD Early Child Care
Research Network, 2004).  Yet, not all children seem to be equally affected by adversity.  Guided by theories of diﬀerential susceptibility
(Belsky & Pluess,(Boyce & Ellis, 2005), a number of studies have demonstrated that individual diﬀerences in stress reactivity, as measured by indices of the
cardiac autonomic nervous system (ANS), can predispose or protect
against the eﬀects of adversity on children’s behavioral maladjustment
(e. g.  El-Sheikh & Erath, 2011).  Although these studies provide important insights into physiological measures of susceptibility, they have
focused mostly on older children.  Little is known about the role of the
cardiac ANS in interaction with early adversity during infancy when the
physiological systems involved in emotion regulation are emerging and
presumably most responsive to environmental inﬂuences (Beauchaine,
Neuhaus, Brenner, & Gatzke-Kopp, 2008; Laurent, Harold, Leve,
Shelton, & Van Goozen, 2016). 
sensitivity
Altered ANS functioning has been consistently linked to aggression
in children,
(Van Goozen, Fairchild,
Snoek & Harold, 2008).  The ANS is comprised of a sympathetic (SNS)
and adults
adolescents
and parasympathetic (PNS) branch.  PNS activity is often assessed by
respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA).  RSA is the heart rate variability at
the frequency of respiration (Cacioppo, Uchino, & Berntson, 1994), and
is considered to index the neural control of the heart via the vagus
nerve (Porges, 2007).  During restful periods, the vagus exerts an inhibitory inﬂuence on the heart acting as a ‘brake’ by increasing vagal
output to the sino-atrial (SA) node of the heart and limiting sympathetic
inﬂuences which contribute to a slow and steady heart rate.  In response
to stress, the vagal ‘brake’ is disengaged resulting in a decrease in vagal
output to the SA node of the heart and thus contributing to an increase
in heart rate (Porges, 2007).  If withdrawal of the vagal ‘brake’ is not
suﬃcient to manage a stressor, the sympathetic activity is expected to
increase in order to prepare the body for a more active stress response. 
The majority of research examining stress reactivity in young children has focused on RSA or global measures of cardiac autonomic
functioning like HR without speciﬁc assessments of activity within the
sympathetic branch.  Pre-ejection period (PEP) reﬂects the time interval
between the onset of the heartbeat and ejection of blood into the aorta
(Cacioppo Name, 1994) and is commonly used as an index of myocardial
contractility and sympathetic control of the heart (Berntson Name,
1994).  Both RSA and PEP are used as indicators of the complex processes that underlie responsiveness of the ANS to a changing environment, e. g. , from rest (baseline) to challenge or vice versa. 
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Clinical Child and Adolescent Studies, Leiden University, Wassenaarseweg 52, Box 9555, 2300 RB Leiden, Room 4A03, The Netherlands. 
E-mail address: suurlandj@fsw. leidenuniv. nl (J.  Suurland). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 005
Received 21 October 2016; Received in revised form 11 July 2017; Accepted 11 July 2017
Available online 15 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
J.  Suurland Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 98–104
Low baseline PNS activity, as indicated by RSA, has been identiﬁed
as a vulnerability factor that exacerbates the relation between adversity
(e. g.  marital conﬂict, parental drinking problems) and children’s externalizing behavior (El-Sheikh, 2005a; El-Sheikh Name, 2001).  Other
studies have measured RSA reactivity to stress, with decreases in RSA in
response to stress considered to be indicative of better adaptation (ElSheikh & Erath, 2011).  RSA withdrawal in response to stress has been
associated with lower levels of externalizing behavior in the context of
adversity (El-Sheikh, 2001; Katz, 2007), although ﬁndings have been
inconsistent (Obradovic, Bush, Stamperdahl, Adler, & Boyce, 2010). 
Studies investigating interactions between adversity and SNS activity
(measured as skin conductance level [SCL] in most studies) indicate
that either very low or very high baseline levels of SCL and high SCL
reactivity may increase the risk of aggression and externalizing behavior in the context of adversity (El-Sheikh, 2005b; El-Sheikh Name,It is clear that ANS functioning has important implications for the
association between adversity and the development of aggression. 
However, such associations may be less straightforward in infancy.  For
example, recent studies indicated a stronger positive relation between
higher (rather than lower) baseline RSA and (externalizing) problem
behavior in infants and toddlers exposed to a more negative caregiving
environment (Conradt, Measelle, & Ablow, 2013; Eisenberg Name,
2012).  Measures of RSA reactivity and SNS functioning in infants have
not been studied as moderators of relations between early adversity and
aggression before, although there is one study in toddlers reporting no
eﬀects of RSA reactivity (Eisenberg Name, 2012). 
Adaptation to stressful contexts requires a delicate balance in the
operation of both the PNS and SNS (Porges, 2007), and the synergistic
action of both systems determines the eﬀectiveness of regulation
(Berntson, Cacioppo, & Quigley, 1991).  Although the eﬀects of both
branches of the ANS on the heart is generally believed to be reciprocal,
with increased activity in one branch and decreased activity in the
other, reactivity in both branches can also be nonreciprocal (i. e. , increased or decreased activity of both branches at the same time;
Berntson Name, 1991).  Reciprocal cardiac PNS activation, with increased PNS stimulation and decreased SNS stimulation on the heart, is
expected during calm states, while reciprocal SNS activation (i. e. , increased SNS activity and decreased PNS activity) is more adaptive when
confronted with challenging stressful situations.  Previous studies have
suggested that reciprocal cardiac SNS activation in response to stress is
normative in children, adolescents and adults
(Alkon, Boyce,
Davis, & Eskenazi, 2011; Berntson Name, 1991; Salomon Name, 2000),
and linked to better emotion regulation in young children (Stifter,
Dollar, & Cipriano, 2011).  Conversely, nonreciprocal activation of PNS
and SNS, as indicated by coactivation (i. e. , increased activity in both
the PNS and SNS) and coinhibition (i. e. , decreased activity in both the
PNS and SNS), has been linked to more externalizing problems in
school-aged children in the context of marital conﬂict, compared to
patterns of reciprocal SNS activation or reciprocal PNS activation (ElSheikh Name, 2009).  Similar ﬁndings have been reported in the context
of maltreatment predicting aggression in girls (Gordis, Feres, Olezeski,
Rabkin, & Trickett, 2010). 
So far, there have been no studies that we know of that have examined measures of both PNS and SNS functioning in infancy as potential moderators of the eﬀects of early adversity on outcome in toddlerhood.  Elucidating how early physiological systems increase or
decrease susceptibility to aggression, may enhance our ability to identify children at risk of aggression at an early age, before developmental
trajectories begin to be set. 
In the present study, we investigated the interaction between ANS
response to and recovery from stress measured in 6-month-old infants,
taking into consideration both the PNS and SNS, and prenatal risk in
predicting physical aggression at 20 months of age.  We were speciﬁcally interested in cumulative risk as previous work has shown a dosedependent relation between the presence of multiple risk factors andchild adjustment, with increases in the number of risk factors being
associated with increased levels of problems (Appleyard, Egeland, van
Dulmen, & Sroufe, 2005).  We measured parasympathetic RSA and
sympathetic PEP response and recovery from stress.  Although previous
studies involving PNS and SNS interactions have focused on SCL (ElSheikh Name, 2009; Gordis Name, 2010), PEP is considered to be a more
direct measure of cardiac SNS activity (Cacioppo Name, 1994), that can
be reliably measured in infants (Alkon Name, 2006; Quigley & Stifter,
2006).  We hypothesized that higher levels of coactivation and coinhibition would exacerbate the relation between cumulative prenatal risk
and physical aggression, whereas, reciprocal PNS activation and reciprocal SNS activation would attenuate the association between cumulative risk and physical aggression. 
<Middle> Methods and materials. 
1. 1.  Participants
The participants in this study were part of an ongoing longitudinal
study into neurobiological and neurocognitive predictors of early behavior problems (Mother- Infant NeuroDevelopment Study in Leiden,
The Netherlands [MINDS − Leiden]).  We oversampled women based
on the presence of one or more risk factors (see criteria under
Cumulative risk).  The sample was composed of 113 mothers and their
infants (55. 8% males) who had completed the prenatal home-visit
during the third trimester of pregnancy (T1), and the postpartum homevisits at six (T2) and 20 months (T3).  The mean age of the children was
6. 03 months (SD=0. 41, range 5–7 months) at T2 and 19. 94 months
(SD=0. 81, range 18–24 months) at T3.  The mothers were on average
22. 96 years (SD = 2. 12, range 17–27 years) at T1.  Approximately 96%
of the mothers had a partner (87. 6% was married or living with a
partner) and 32. 7% of the mothers had a high educational(Bachelor’s or Master’s degree).  Families were predominantly
Caucasian (88. 5%). 
Of the 136 mothers originally enrolled in the study at T1, 10 did not
participate at T2, and another 13 dropped out between T2 and T3.  Main
reasons for families dropping out were inability to contact, moving
away or too busy.  Sample attrition was unrelated to demographic
variables (i. e. , maternal age, ethnicity, marital status, educational level;
ps > 0. 05).  However, mothers who dropped out were more often
single (χ 2(1) = 8. 41, p = 0. 013). 
The study was approved by the ethics committee of the Department
of Education and Child Studies at the Faculty of Social and Behavioral
Sciences, Leiden University, and by the Medical Research Ethics
Committee at Leiden University Medical Centre.  Informed consent was
obtained from all parents of infants included in the study.  Mothers were
compensated for each completed home or laboratory visit and children
were given a small present for their participation. 
1. 2.  Procedures
The protocol during the six-month home-visit (2 h), included attachment of cardiac monitoring equipment to the infant’s chest and
back after which they watched a 2-min relaxing movie while lying on a
blanket, followed by two procedures designed to elicit physiological
responses to social stress (Still Face Paradigm) and frustration (Car
seat).  The social stress and frustration tasks were administered with a
break in between to limit carry over eﬀects.  Infants were only assessed
in the next procedure when they were calm and displayed no distress. 
The home-visits were scheduled at a time of the day when mothers
deemed their infant to be most alert. StillParadigmIJzendoorn, & Bakermans-Kranenburg, 2009) is a well-established social stress paradigm comprising a sequence of three 2-min episodes
during which the mother is asked to interact normally with the infant
(SFP baseline), then withhold interaction (SFP social stress), and then(SFP;
J.  Suurland Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 98–104
resume interaction (SFP recovery) (for a more detailed description of
the SFP, see Suurland, Van der Heijden, Smaling, Huijbregts, Van
Goozen, & Swaab, 2016).  The Car Seat (CS) task, adapted from the Laboratory Temperament Assessment Battery Pre-locomotor version (LabTAB; Goldsmith & Rothbart, 1999), was used to measure infant physiological response to a frustrating event.  Following a 2-min baseline
(CS baseline), mothers placed their infants in a car seat and stood 1 m
away from their child.  After 1 min of restraint (CS frustration), a 2-min
recovery period (CS recovery) followed in which mothers were allowed
to hold their child and interact as they normally would.  Mothers were
instructed to remain neutral and refrain from comforting or speaking to
the child during the CS frustration episode. 
During the challenge episodes, infant distress (i. e. , whining, fussing
or crying) was coded by trained raters from videotaped recordings according to scales of
the Mother Infant Coding System (Miller,
McDonough, Rosenblum, & Sameroﬀ, 2002) for the SFP; the Lab-TAB
coding system (Goldsmith & Rothbart, 1999) was used for the CS. 
During the SFP social stress and the CS frustration episodes respectively
26. 8% and 25. 5% of the infants showed signs of distress. 
1. 3.  Measures
1. 3. 1.  Physiological measures
Parasympathetic RSA and sympathetic PEP were monitored continuously with the Vrije Universiteit Ambulatory Monitoring System
(VU-AMS 5 fs; De Geus, Willemsen, Klaver, & Van Doornen, 1995;
Willemsen, De Geus, Klaver, Van Doornen, & Carroll, 1996).  The VUAMS device continuously recorded electrocardiogram (ECG), and impedance cardiogram (ICG) measures; basal thorax impedance (Z0),
changes in impedance (dZ), and the ﬁrst derivative of pulsatile changes
in transthoracic impedance (dZ/dt).  The ECG and dZ/dt signal were
sampled at 1000 Hz, and the Z0 signal was sampled at 10 Hz.  The
VUDAMS software suite version 2. 0 was used to extract mean values of
heart rate (HR), RSA, and PEP across SFP baseline (2 min), SFP social
stress (2 min), and SFP recovery (2 min), and CS baseline (2 min), CS
frustration (1 min), and CS recovery (2 min). 
R-peaks in the ECG, scored by the software, were visually checked
and adjusted manually when necessary.  RSA was derived by the peaktrough method (De Geus Name, 1995; Grossman Name, 1990), which
combined the respiration (obtained from ﬁltered [0. 1–0. 4 Hz] thoracic
impedance signal) and inter beat interval (IBI) time series to calculate
the shortest IBI during heart rate acceleration in the inspiration phase
and the longest IBI during deceleration in the expiration phase (De Geus
Name, 1995).  RSA was deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the longest
IBI’s during expiration and shortest IBI’s during inspiration.  Automatic
scoring of RSA was checked by visual inspection of the respiratory
signal from the entire recording.  RSA was not calculated if > 30% of
the data in an episode were missing. 
PEP is the time interval between the onset of the ventricular depolarization (Q-wave onset) and the onset of left ventricular ejection of
blood into the aorta (B-point on the Dz/dt complex) (De Geus Name,
1995).  Average dZ/dt waveforms were derived by the software.  PEP
was automatically scored from the Q-wave onset (opening of the aortic
valve) on the ECG and the B-point on the dZ/dt waveform.  Each automated scoring was checked and corrected manually when necessary
(Riese Name, 2003).  In case waveforms were morphologically distorted
in such a way that visual correction of automated scoring was not
possible, these waveforms were discarded.  The procedure of interactive
visual scoring was done independently by two trained raters.  Postscoring, the raters chose a consensus for the points where their judgment did not overlap, and these were retained for analysis; inter-rater
reliability (intraclass correlation, ICC) was 0. 949. 
1. 3. 2.  Cumulative risk
During the third trimester of pregnancy (between 26 and 40 weeks
gestation, M = 29. 78, SD = 3. 63), mothers were screened for the
presence of risk factors (see for a more elaborate description of these
criteria: Smaling Name, 2015; Suurland Name, 2016), including current
psychiatric disorder(s) with the Dutch version of the Mini- International
Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI-plus; Van Vliet, Leroy, & Van Megen,
2000), substance use (alcohol, tobacco and/or drugs) during pregnancy, no secondary education, unemployment, self-reported ﬁnancial
problems, limited or instable social support network, single status, and
maternal age < 20 years.  The cumulative risk score was computed as
the sum of risk factors present (maximum number of risk factors was
10), with M=0. 67, SD=0. 93 (range 0–3).  There were 66 mothers with
no risk factors, 25 with one risk factor, 15 with two risk factors, and 7
with three risk factors.  The prevalence of the diﬀerent risk factors
among mothers with one or more risk factors (41. 6%) was: 55. 3%
current psychiatric diagnosis, 4. 3% alcohol, 44. 7% smoking, 2. 1%
drugs, 10. 6% single status, 10. 6% unemployed, 4. 3% no secondary
education, 8. 5% ﬁnancial problems, 8. 5% limited social support, 14. 9%
age < 20 years. 
1. 3. 3.  Maternal reports of physical aggression
Mothers reported on their child’s physical aggression at 20 months
using the 11-item Physical Aggression Scale for Early Childhood
(PASEC; Alink Name, 2006).  Mothers indicated whether their child had
shown physically aggressive behaviors (e. g.  ‘hits’, ‘kicks’, ‘destroying
things’) in the past two months on a 3-point Likert scale (0 = ‘not’ true
to 2 = ‘very true or often true').  A total score for physical aggression
was calculated by summing item scores (range 0–22).  Internal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha) was 0. 73. 
1. 4.  Missing data
Approximately 12% of ANS data were missing across the SFP and CS
episodes.  Missing data were due to dyads that did not complete the SFP
or CS because the infant became too fussy (3. 8%), loose electrodes
(5. 7%), equipment failure (1. 9%), or excessive child movement in
which case PEP and/or RSA could not be scored (88. 6%).  Missing data
were not systematically related to demographic and obstetric variables
(see variables listed in Table 1; ps > 0. 250) or cumulative risk and
physical aggression (ps > 0. 250).  Main analyses were conducted based
on the number of infants for which there was data (see Supplementary
Table 1 for available ANS data across SFP and CS episodes). 
1. 5.  Data analysis
All variables were examined for outliers and violations of speciﬁc
assumptions applying to the statistical tests used.  Variables with values
that exceeded > 3SD from the group mean were recoded to the next
extreme value within 3SD from the mean (across all SFP and CS episodes there were 14 outliers for RSA and two outliers for PEP).  Because
RSA was skewed at baseline, the emotional challenge tasks, and recovery, its natural logarithm (lnRSA) was used in the analyses. 
Baseline levels of lnRSA and PEP were signiﬁcantly correlated with
lnRSA and PEP challenge scores (rs = . 27 to 0. 84, ps < 0. 001). 
Further, lnRSA and PEP challenge scores were signiﬁcantly correlated
with lnRSA and PEP recovery scores (rs = . 53 to 0. 87, ps < 0. 001).  To
control for initial levels of arousal, response and recovery variables for
lnRSA and PEP were computed as standardized residualized change
scores (Eisenberg Name, 2012; El-Sheikh Name, 2009).  The standardized
residualized change scores for response to challenge were obtained by
regressing the challenge scores on the baseline levels and for recovery
from challenge by regressing the recovery scores on the challenge
scores.  This was done separately for the SFP and the CS.  The standardized residualized change scores for lnRSA and PEP during response
and recovery on the SFP were signiﬁcantly correlated with the standardized residualized change scores for lnRSA and PEP during response
and recovery on the CS (rs = . 24 to 0. 28, with ps = 0. 021 to 0. 009). 
Therefore, the residualized change scores of lnRSA and PEP on the SFPJ.  Suurland et al. Means, standard deviations and correlations among study variables . 
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 98–104
Variable2. 4. 7. 9. M
1.  Cumulative risk
2.  Ethnicity (% Caucasian)
3.  Infant sex (% male)
4.  Gestational age (weeks)
5.  Birth weight (kg)
7.  LnRSA response
8.  PEP response
9.  LnRSA recovery
10.  PEP recovery
11.  Physical aggression0. 10−0. 030. 02−0. 090. 28**0. 07−0. 05−0. 080. 16–−0. 17†0. 18†0. 01–−0. 01−0. 16†−0. 020. 09−0. 14−0. 01−0. 090. 20*–−0. 30**–0. 04−0. 0288. 5%39. 210. 090. 022. 850. 930. 533. 283. 69range32–42−0. 61–1. 14
−5. 81–11. 25
−0. 60–. 89
−14. 99–9. 67Note: lnRSA = natural logarithm of respiratory sinus arrhythmia, PEP = pre-ejection period.  Spearman correlations were used to compute correlations with cumulative risk and Pearson
correlations were used for correlations between all other variables. 
† < 0. 10. 
* p < 0. 05. 
** p < 0. 01. 
*** p < 0. 001. 
and CS were averaged to create four indices: lnRSA response and PEP
response (average SFP and CS) and lnRSA recovery and PEP recovery
(average SFP and CS).  Negative values reﬂect lnRSA and PEP decreases
(i. e. , greater PNS suppression and greater SNS activation respectively),
while positive values reﬂect lnRSA and PEP increases (i. e. , greater PNS
activation and greater SNS suppression respectively). 
Preliminary analyses tested for potential covariates (demographic
and obstetric characteristics).  Hierarchical linear regression analyses
were conducted to examine the interactive eﬀects of cumulative risk
and ANS response and recovery on physical aggression.  Two sets of
regression analyses were conducted: (1) lnRSA and PEP response
measures, and (2) lnRSA and PEP recovery measures.  All variables were
centered to their mean prior to analyses (Aiken & West, 1991).  Step 1
included cumulative risk, Step 2 included lnRSA and PEP, Step 3 included all two-way interactions between cumulative risk, lnRSA and
PEP, and Step 4 included the three-way interaction between cumulative
risk, lnRSA, and PEP.  Signiﬁcant interaction eﬀects were examined
following procedures recommended by Aiken and West (Aiken & West,
1991) by plotting regression lines of the relation between cumulative
risk and physical aggression at 0 risk factors and 1. 6 risk factors (i. 