Local Signals in Mouse Horizontal Cell DendritesHighlights
d Light-evoked Ca2+ signals in horizontal cell dendrites reﬂect
opsin gradient
d Chromatic preferences in neighboring dendritic tips vary
markedly
d Mouse horizontal cells process cone photoreceptor inputd Local horizontal cell feedback shapes the temporal
properties of cone outputCamille A.  Chapot, Christian Behrens,
Luke E.  Rogerson, . . . , Philipp Berens,
Thomas Euler, Timm Schubert
Correspondence
thomas. euler@cin. uni-tuebingen. detimm. schubert@cin. uni-tuebingen. deIn Brief
Chapot Name show that local light
responses in mouse horizontal cell
dendrites inherit properties, including
chromatic preference, from the
presynaptic cone photoreceptor,
suggesting that their dendrites can
provide private feedback to cones, for
instance, to shape the temporal ﬁltering
properties of the cone synapse. 
Chapot Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3603–3615
December 4, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 050
Current BiologyLocal Signals in Mouse Horizontal Cell Dendrites
Camille A.  Chapot,1,2,3 Christian Behrens,1,2,3,4 Luke E.  Rogerson,1,2,3,4 Tom Baden,1,5 Sinziana Pop,1,2,3
Philipp Berens,1,2,4 Thomas Euler,1,2,4,* and Timm Schubert1,2,6,*
1Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
2Center for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
3Graduate Training Centre of Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
4Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
5School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: thomas. euler@cin. uni-tuebingen. de (T. E. ), timm. schubert@cin. uni-tuebingen. de (T. S. )
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 050The mouse retina contains a single type of horizontal
cell, a GABAergic interneuron that samples from all
cone photoreceptors within reach and modulates
their glutamatergic output via parallel
feedback
mechanisms.  Because horizontal cells form an electrically coupled network, they have been implicated
in global signal processing, such as large-scale
contrast enhancement.  Recently, it has been proposed that horizontal cells can also act locally at the
level of individual cone photoreceptors.  To test this
possibility physiologically, we used two-photon microscopy to record light stimulus-evoked Ca2+ signals
in cone axon terminals and horizontal cell dendrites as
well as glutamate release in the outer plexiform layer. 
By selectively stimulating the two mouse cone opsins
with green and UV light, we assessed whether signals
from individual cones remain isolated within horizontal cell dendritic tips or whether they spread across
the dendritic arbor.  Consistent with the mouse’s opsin
expression gradient, we found that the Ca2+ signals
recorded from dendrites of dorsal horizontal cells
were dominated by M-opsin and those of ventral
horizontal cells by S-opsin activation.  The signals
measured in neighboring horizontal cell dendritic
tips varied markedly in their chromatic preference,
arguing against global processing.  Rather, our experimental data and results from biophysically realistic
modeling support the idea that horizontal cells can
process cone input locally, extending the classical
view of horizontal cell function.  Pharmacologically
removing horizontal cells from the circuitry reduced
the sensitivity of the cone signal to low frequencies,
suggesting that local horizontal cell feedback shapes
the temporal properties of cone output. 
INTRODUCTION
Most neurons in the brain have elaborate dendritic arbors
capable of more than simply integrating synaptic input.  Studies
of neurons from different brain regions, such as cerebellar Purkinje cells [1], cortical pyramidal cells [2], hippocampal neurons
[3], and retinal amacrine cells [4, 5], have demonstrated that dendrites can be functionally highly compartmentalized.  Often,
multiple dendritic units can both process synaptic input and
generate synaptic output independently and at a local scale
(reviewed in [6]).  The cellular mechanisms supporting dendritic
processing include anatomical specializations, differential distribution of active channels, and the local restriction of intracellular
signaling (reviewed in [6]).  Moreover, computational work suggests that dendrites can even switch between local and global
signal processing [7].  Such functional compartmentalization of
dendritic arbors greatly increases the computational power of
single neurons and, therefore, that of the brain. 
In the retina, dendritic processing has been mainly studied in
ganglion cells [8, 9] and amacrine cells [4], where dendritic subunits vary dramatically in size and function.  For example, starburst amacrine cell dendritic arbors are divided in sections that
individually compute direction of visual motion [10, 11], while individual dendritic varicosities of A17 amacrine cells provide local
reciprocal feedback to individual rod bipolar cell terminals under
low-light conditions [4].  However, the outer retina also contains a
candidate for dendritic processing, the horizontal cell (HC).  This
is a GABAergic interneuron that provides reciprocal feedback
to photoreceptors and shapes their transmitter release [12–14]. 
The dendrites of HCs contact cone photoreceptors (cones),
whereas their axon terminal system contacts rod photoreceptors
(rods) [15]. 
Traditionally, HCs have been implicated in global processing,
such as contrast enhancement and the generation of antagonistic center-surround receptive ﬁelds (reviewed in [16]).  This is
consistent with the fact that HCs form a gap junction-coupled
network [17], which allows averaging signals across many
cones.  However, recent studies suggest that HCs support also
a local mode of operation and that HC feedback can act at the
level of a single synaptic contact between an HC dendritic tip
and a cone ([14, 18]; for discussion see [19]) (Figures 1A and 1B). 
Here, we test this idea by recording light stimulus-evoked signals at the HC-cone synapse in a slice preparation of the mouse
retina using two-photon Ca2+ [20, 21] and glutamate imaging
[22].  We exploited the particular retinal distribution of mouse
cone types to discriminate between global and local processing:
Mice express two types of cone opsins, a short (S, UV) and a
medium (M, green) wavelength-sensitive opsin.  So-called true
S-cones [23] exclusively express S-opsin and are homogenously
Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd.  3603
Figure 1.  Identiﬁcation of Cone Axon Terminals and HC Processes in Mouse Retinal Slices
(A) Schematic representation of the connectivity between S- (blue) or M-cones (green) and a horizontal cell (HC, orange).  The box corresponds to the enlarged
schemata shown in (B).  The black line indicates the cone axon terminal base. 
(B) Neighboring S- and M-cones with postsynaptic HC dendrites.  Bipolar cell dendrites are shown in white.  The arrows indicate the hypothesized spread of
signals in HC dendrites.  Left: global (lateral) signal spread along HC dendrites.  Right: local signal processing in HC dendritic tips. 
(C and D) Bath application of sulforhodamine 101 (SR101) (top images in C and D) to identify cone axon terminals in retinal slices of the Cx57+/cre 3 Ai38 (C) and
HR2. 1:TN-XL (D) mouse lines.  Outlines of cone axon terminals were manually drawn for illustration purposes; solid lines indicate cone axon terminal base, and
dotted lines indicate outer plexiform layer (OPL) borders.  Upper right diagram depicts imaged synaptic compartment and the biosensor used (red). 
(E) Left: SR101 ﬂuorescence with line marking the cone axon terminal base (analogous to A, C, and D).  Right: GCaMP3-labeled HC processes are superimposed
by regions of interest (ROIs; gray, exemplary ROI marked red) automatically determined (STAR Methods). 
(F) Ca2+ responses to green, UV, and white (GUW) 1 s light ﬂashes of exemplary ROI (in E).  The continuous Ca2+ trace (left) and average of n = 10 trials for each
stimulus condition (right) are shown (Ca2+ signals de-trended by high-pass ﬁltering at 0. 1 Hz and z-normalized; STAR Methods).  Scale bars, 5 mm. 
See also Figure S1. 
distributed across the retina, while M-cones co-express both
opsins at a ratio that changes from M- to S-opsin dominant along
the dorsoventral axis [24].  Thus, recording at different retinal
locations with different-wavelength stimuli makes it possible to
test if signals of neighboring cones mix in the postsynaptic HC
dendritic process.  We found that cone signals indeed remain
local in the contacting HC dendritic tips, suggesting that HCs
support a local mode of operation. 
3604 Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Identiﬁcation of Cone Axon Terminals and HC Processes
in the Mouse Retinal Slice
We recorded Ca2+ signals in retinal slices prepared from transgenic mice (Cx57+/cre 3 Ai38; see the STAR Methods).  HC
processes could be identiﬁed in retinal slices by their GCaMP3
expression (Figure 1C).  To identify cone axon terminals, we
bath-applied SR101 [25], which is taken up from the extracellular
solution by the terminals of synaptically very active cells, such as
photoreceptors, during vesicle endocytosis [26].  We conﬁrmed
that the (larger) SR101-labeled structures in the outer plexiform
layer (OPL) were cone axon terminals with slices prepared
from HR2. 1:TN-XL mice [21], in which exclusively cones expressed TN-XL (Figure 1D). 
Light-Evoked Ca2+ Signals in HC Processes
To record light-evoked Ca2+ signals in HC dendritic segments,
we imaged ﬁelds in the OPL while presenting green, UV, or
white light ﬂashes (GUW protocol, STAR Methods) (Figures 1E
and 1F).  The resulting GCaMP3 ﬂuorescence image series was
averaged to anatomically deﬁned regions of interest (ROIs)
(STAR Methods).  We only considered ROIs that responded to
white ﬂashes and fulﬁlled two strict quality criteria, a quality index
(Qi) and a consistency index (Ci) (Figure S1; STAR Methods),
yielding 423 ROIs (4. 3% from a total of 9,912 ROIs) with reliable
light-evoked Ca2+ signals for further analysis (Figures S1B–S1D). 
Because the structural layout of the cone synapse is highly
stereotypical [27], we assumed that ROIs located close to the
cone axon terminal base are likely to be HC dendritic tips, since
this is where they make invaginating contacts with the cones
(reviewed in [19]).  ROIs well above the cone base are expected
to belong mostly to HC axon terminal tips (contacting rods),
whereas ROIs below the cone base should be located on HC primary dendrites [27].  To get an estimate of each ROI’s identity, we
manually determined the base of the cone terminals as a
landmark (solid lines in Figures 1A and 1C–1E) in each imaged
ﬁeld based on SR101 labeling.  We used the sharp transition
between the brightly stained cone axon terminals and the dimmer SR101 labeling below, which likely represented HC dendrites [26].  We estimated the distance (dbase) to the cone axon
terminal base for each ROI.  Responsive ROIs were most
frequent just above the cone axon terminal base (61. 5% ROIs
within 0 < dbase < 5 mm), within the OPL band occupied by
cone terminals.  Here, ROIs had the highest Qi values (Figure S1E)
and the largest light-evoked Ca2+ signals (Figure S1F), suggesting that we could indeed measure responses from HC dendritic
processes in or very close to the cone synapse. 
Mechanisms Underlying Light-Evoked Ca2+ ResponsesTo conﬁrm that the Ca2+ responses were mediated by glutamate
release from photoreceptors, we puff-applied the AMPA/KAtype glutamate receptor antagonist 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline-2,3dione (NBQX; 200 mM) while presenting white ﬂashes (Figures
2A and 2B).  NBQX signiﬁcantly decreased the Ca2+ baseline
level (F0) in HC processes, and it virtually abolished light-evoked
Ca2+ signals, as indicated by a signiﬁcant reduction in response
amplitude (DF) and area under the curve (FArea) (Figures 2C–2E;
for statistics, see Table 1). 
Earlier experiments on isolated mouse HCs had shown that
intracellular Ca2+ is modulated by inﬂux through Ca2+-permeable
AMPA/KA receptors, L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels
(VGCCs), and by release from internal Ca2+ stores [28].  To test
how these pathways contributed to the Ca2+ signals in HC
dendrites, we puff-applied a mixture of AMPA (50 mM) and KA
(25 mM) before and in the presence of blockers (Figure S2).  The
response amplitudes to AMPA/KA puffs alone decreased during
the experiment (Figures S2A and S2C), possibly caused by
downregulation of VGCCs and/or Ca2+ stores due to the strong
pharmacological stimulus.  We estimated this run-down from two
consecutive puffs by calculating the ratio of the response amplitudes (DF2/DF1).  When applying the L-type VGCC blocker verapamil (100 mM) 5 min before the second AMPA/KA puff, DF2/DF1
was signiﬁcantly reduced compared to control (Figures S2A,
S2B, and S2E; for statistics, see Table 1), conﬁrming that VGCCs
contributed to the signals. 
In separate experiments, we tested if
intracellular Ca2+
stores could be involved in amplifying Ca2+ signals in HC
processes.  We bath-applied the sarco-endoplasmic reticulum
inhibitor thapsigargin (5 mM), which
Ca2+ ATPase (SERCA)
blocks Ca2+ store reﬁll and leads to the depletion of Ca2+
stores [28], 20 min before the second AMPA/KA puff.  Thapsigargin decreased DF2/DF1 signiﬁcantly (Figures S2C, S2D, and S2F;
Table 1), suggesting that release from stores contributes to Ca2+
signals in HC dendrites. 
In summary, the observed light-evoked Ca2+ signals in HC
processes result from a combination of Ca2+ sources, in agreement with earlier ﬁndings [13, 28–31].  Moreover, they are modulated by GABA auto-reception (see Figure S3 and Table S1). 
Light-Evoked Ca2+ Signals in HCs Reﬂect the DorsalVentral Opsin Expression Gradient
Next, we recorded HC light-evoked Ca2+ responses at different
locations along the dorsoventral axis of the retina, using the
mouse opsin expression gradient as a tool to speciﬁcally activate
different combinations of S- and M-cones.  While the mouse
retina contains only 5% true S-cones [23], ontogenetic
M-cones in the ventral retina co-express large amounts of
S-opsin and, thus, are functional S-cones [24, 32].  Therefore, if
the spectral preference of the HC Ca2+ signals reﬂects this
gradient, this indicates that cones (and not rods) dominantly
drive these signals and that we are recording from HC dendrites. 
We determined the spectral contrast (SC; STAR Methods) of
each ROI as a function of its location along the dorsoventral
axis (Figure 3).  Consistent with the reported opsin gradient
[32], we found that dorsal HC responses were dominated by
M- and ventral HC responses by S-opsin activation (Figures 3A
and 3B).  ROIs located close to the cone axon terminal base
 5, Wilcoxon rank-sum test)
( 4 % dbase % 4 mm) had signiﬁcantly higher absolute SC
values (jSC-4. +4j = 0. 717 ± 0. 022; mean ± SEM; n = 342) than
ROIs below (dbase <  4 mm, jSC < 4j = 0. 417 ± 0. 045; n = 28;
p = 1. 611$10
(Figure 3C).  This
suggests that the HC distal tips reﬂect the contacted cone’s
chromatic preference and, thus, local signals.  More proximal
dendrites, on the other hand, average across cones, and, thus,
they show spatial integration, in agreement with the funnel shape
of the dbase versus SC plot (Figures 3A and 3B).  In the transitional
zone between dorsal and ventral retina halves, both a UV- and a
green-dominated ROI population co-exist (Figure 3D).  Opsin
immunostaining of slices from this zone conﬁrmed that the distribution of UV and green ROIs reﬂects cone opsin expression
(Figure 3E).  ROIs in the nasal part of the slice were UV sensitive,
and those in the temporal part were green sensitive, consistent
with the transitional zone running at a shallow angle relative to
the naso-temporal axis (Figure 3E, right scheme) [32].  Together,
Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017 3605
Figure 2.  Light-Evoked Ca2+ Responses in HC Processes Are Mediated by the Activation of AMPA/Kainate-type Glutamate Receptors
(A) Exemplary Ca2+ responses of HC processes to white ﬂashes before (control), after a NBQX puff, and during wash-out. 
(B) Averaged responses for control (green), NBQX (orange), and wash-out (blue) (trials in gray) for the traces shown in (A). 
(C–E) Quantiﬁcation of NBQX effects on response baseline (F0, C), amplitude (DF, D), and area under the curve (FArea, E) (average of n = 23 ROIs from 4 slices, 2
animals).  Error bars indicate SEM; +p % 0. 025, ++p % 0. 005, and +++p % 0. 0005, Bonferroni-corrected signiﬁcance threshold). 
See also Figures S2 and S3 and Table S1. 
our data indicate that the activity recorded in ROIs close to the
cone axon terminal base is mostly cone driven and likely reﬂects
activity in HC dendritic tips. 
Local Light-Evoked Ca2+ Signals in HC Dendritic Tips
Next, we assessed if signals from individual cones remain isolated within HC distal dendrites or if they spread across the cells’
dendritic arbors (or the electrically coupled HC network) (Figure 1B).  We looked for recording ﬁelds where neighboring
ROIs had different SC preferences (i. e. , contained ROIs with
SC > 0 and ROIs with SC < 0).  Indeed, this was the case for 15
of a total of 125 recording ﬁelds in both dorsal (5 ﬁelds; Figure 3F)
and ventral retina (10 ﬁelds; Figure 3G). 
To quantify this ﬁnding, we focused on purely UV and green
ROIs (jSCj > 0. 3; 7 ﬁelds, 22 ROIs), and we analyzed the distribution of the lateral distance between each UV ROI and its neighbors (Figure 3H).  We found that UV ROIs clustered in close
proximity (<10 mm) of each UV ROI, suggesting that they are
driven by the same cone, while the majority of green ROIs
3606 Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017
clustered at larger distances (>10 mm).  The distribution of green
ROIs appeared to be periodic with the average distance approximating that between cone axon terminals (8 mm, cf.  Figures 1C
and 1D), indicating that these (green) ROIs were likely driven by
other cones. 
HC Dendritic Processes Inherit Properties of the
Presynaptic Cone
If HC dendritic tips reﬂect the local cone output, the measured
signals are expected to share properties with the cone signals
(see also Figure S4).  To test this, we presented a colored noise
stimulus (see the STAR Methods), and we measured correlations
between neighboring cone axon terminals and between neighboring HC dendritic tips in the dorsal retina (Figure 4).  If HCs
integrated signals globally, e. g. , by averaging across an HC’s
dendritic arbor or by electrical HC coupling, we would expect a
higher correlation between HC dendritic tips for the two stimulus
classes, due to the lateral signal spread, than for cone axon terminals.  The cone recordings were performed in HR2. 1:TN-XL
Table 1.  Pharmacology for AMPA/KA-type Glutamate Receptors, Voltage-Gated Ca2+ Channels, and Ca2+ Release from Stores
Pharmacology for AMPA/KA-type Glutamate ReceptorsDF (SD)
Number of Mice/
Slices/ROIsControl1. 235 ± 0. 163
FArea (a. u. )
Pharmacology for Voltage-Gated Ca2+ Channels and Ca2+ Release from Stores
1. 024 ± 0. 167
Number of Mice/
Slices/ROIs
Control (5’)
Verapamil (5’)
Control (20’)2/3/18AMPA/KA Puff 1
DF1 [SD]
3. 106 ± 0. 286
2. 011 ± 0. 177
2. 842 ± 0. 209 1. 470 ± 0. 069 (p = 2. 384$10
0. 156 ± 0. 029 (p = 2. 384$10
 0. 012 ± 0. 044 (p = 4. 768$10
AMPA/KA Puff 2 DF2 [SD]
(DF2 versus DF1)
1. 648 ± 0. 198 (p = 1. 025$10
0. 426 ± 0. 130 (p = 7. 629$10
2. 293 ± 0. 167 (p = 0. 014)
0. 814 ± 0. 256 (p = 3. 662$10 7) 7) 6) 1. 348 ± 0. 046 (p = 0. 033)
0. 362 ± 0. 064 (p = 0. 007)
0. 257 ± 0. 071 (p = 0. 003)
DF2/DF1 Median [MAD]
(versus Control)
0. 439 ± 0. 137
0. 127 ± 145 (p = 9. 088$100. 855 ± 0. 284
0. 499 ± 0. 140 (p = 9. 163$102/4/14
Thapsigargin (20’)
NBQX, AMPA/KA-type glutamate receptor antagonist; Ca2+ baseline (F0), amplitude (DF), and area under the curve (FArea) of light-evoked Ca2+
responses; verapamil, L-type VGCC blocker; thapsigargin, inhibitor of sarco-endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPases; amplitude puff 1 (DF1), amplitude
puff 2 (DF2), ratio puff 2/puff 1 (DF2/DF1); MAD, median absolute deviation; SD, standard deviation.  Wilcoxon signed-rank test and Wilcoxon rank-sum
test (DF2/DF1). 
2. 297 ± 0. 387
mice [21] in which cones expressed the Ca2+ biosensor TN-XL
(cf.  Figure 1D). 
We calculated the linear correlation coefﬁcient (r) between Ca2+
traces from cone ROIs (Figures 4A–4C) in the same recording
ﬁeld, in response to colored noise and to the GUW stimulus. 
Because the noise is a weaker stimulus compared to the GUW
ﬂashes, the correlation between cone terminal responses signiﬁcantly decreased for the noise (Table S2), both when only considering negative transients (Figure 4G) and when comparing whole
traces (Figure 4H).  We repeated this experiment on HCs in
Cx57+/cre 3 Ai38 mice (Figures 4D–4F), and, indeed, like for the
cones, the correlation between HC responses decreased for
colored noise compared to GUW stimulation (Table S2), for negative transients (Figure 4G) and whole traces (Figure 4H). 
A direct comparison between the two sets of experiments is
complicated by several factors that inﬂuence the estimation of
response correlation, including different scan rates for GUW
versus noise stimuli, different biosensors in cones versus HCs,
and different ROI sizes.  Nevertheless, our ﬁnding that noise
stimulation results in a similar (relative) decrease in correlation
for both the pre- (cone) and the postsynaptic (HC) signal
(see Dmedian in Table S2) argues in favor of relatively independent signals and possibly local processing in HC distal dendrites. 
This is further supported by the ﬁnding that nearby HC dendrites
possibly receiving input from the same cone show a higher degree of correlation (correlation between negative events versus
distance for noise: Spearman R =  0. 271, p = 2. 28$10Spearman rank correlation test; n = 1,125; Figure S5). 
We also used the Ca2+ responses to the noise stimulus to estimate the temporal receptive ﬁeld (time kernels, STAR Methods;
[33]).  In cone axon terminals (Figure 4I) and HC dendritic tips
(Figure 4J), the time kernels computed using negative Ca2+ transients (cf.  Figures 4C and 4F) displayed robust positive deﬂections.  Grouping cone ROIs by their spectral preference
(derived from their time kernels; STAR Methods) into green,
UV, and mixed revealed a fraction of 4% UV ROIs (Figure 4I),
closely matching the fraction of S-cones in the dorsal mouse
retina [23].  The averaged time kernels of the different groups
looked similar for cones and HCs (Figures 4I and 4J); cone kernels appeared to be slightly faster, likely due to differences in
biosensor properties (TN-XL: tdecay = 0. 2 s, KD in vitro =
2. 2 mM, from [34]; GCaMP3: tdecay = 0. 23 s, KD in vitro =
0. 66 mM, from [20, 35]).  HC kernels were noisier than those of
cones.  This may be related to differences in ROI area (cones:
9. 6 ± 0. 2 mm2, n = 457 ROIs; HCs: 1. 9 ± 0. 1 mm2, n = 344
ROIs) and, thus, different spatial averaging.  The fact that we
observed UV-selective kernels in HC dendritic tips just as in
cones adds further evidence to the notion that HC dendritic
tips show highly local Ca2+ signals (cf.  Figure 3). 
HC Morphology Supports Electrical Isolation of Distal
HC Dendrites
To test if the HC morphology supports electrically isolating at its
dendritic tips, we built a simple, biophysically realistic model of
a dendritic branch, including synapses with cones based on a
volume reconstruction from electron microscopy (EM) data (Figure 5; see the STAR Methods for details).  First, we stimulated a
single HC dendritic tip by injecting a current at the position of
its synaptic cone contact such that
the tip depolarized
to  25 mV.  We measured the resulting voltage and Ca2+ levels
in all other cone-contacting tips, and we found the membrane
voltage dropping rapidly with distance from the stimulated tip
(Figure 5B).  Only in directly neighboring tips (%15 mm distance),
the depolarization was sufﬁcient to activate VGCCs; however,
even then the resulting Ca2+ increase was two orders of magnitude smaller compared to the stimulated tip (Figure 5C).  We also
traced the voltage change from a stimulated tip to the soma (Figures 5D and 5E), showing that the tips were well isolated from the
rest of the HC’s dendritic arbor.  Finally, we tested if our model
could reproduce the light-evoked Ca2+ signals: We connected
a representative mixture of S- and M-cones to the HC, and we
presented full-ﬁeld light ﬂashes (Figure 5F).  The simulated
voltage responses resembled the Ca2+ signals we observed in
distal HC dendrites in terms of time course and spectral preference diversity (e. g. , Figure 3F).  Therefore, these modeling data
are in line with our experimental data, indicating that the HC
Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017 3607
Figure 3.  Light-Evoked Ca2+ Signals in HC Dendrites Reﬂect the Dorsoventral Cone Opsin Expression Gradient and Local Cone Input
(A and B) Plots showing distance between ROI and cone axon terminal base (dbase) as a function of spectral contrast (SC; STAR Methods) for dorsal (n = 262 ROIs)
(A) and ventral retina (n = 161) (B).  Insets: histograms of SC distributions are shown.  Below: averaged Ca2+ signals in response to green and UV ﬂashes for different
SC intervals are shown (averages of n = 10 trials). 
(C) ROI distance to cone axon terminal base (dbase) as a function of jSCj (ROIs from dorsal and ventral retina).  ROIs were separated into three groups (dashed lines)
depending on dbase: above (dbase > 4 mm), below (dbase <  4 mm), and near the cone axon terminal base ( 4 % dbase % 4 mm). 
(D) SC distribution sorted by retinal slice position (dorsal to ventral; distributions peak normalized for each slice position). 
(E) SC of ROIs from 5 locations on the same slice (boxes 1–5) along the naso-temporal axis (position +3, see D) and corresponding S- (blue) and M-opsin (green)
immunolabeling in the temporal, central, and nasal regions. 
(F and G) Examples of recording ﬁelds containing ROIs with different SC for dorsal (F) and ventral (G) retina; respective Ca2+ signals below (averages of n = 10
trials).  Colors reﬂect SC preference of each ROI (color bar in G). 
(H) Spatial distribution of UV- (bottom) and green- (top) preferring ROIs relative to each UV ROI (at 0 mm) (for ROIs with jSCj > 0. 3; n = 22 ROIs from 7 ﬁelds, 4 dorsal
and 3 ventral retinas).  Gray boxes illustrate expected location of neighboring cone axon terminals (+++p % 0. 0005, Bonferroni-corrected signiﬁcance threshold). 
Scale bars, 200 mm (E) and 5 mm (F and G). 
3608 Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017
Figure 4.  In the Dorsal Retina, Light-Evoked Ca2+ Signals in Neighboring Cone Axon Terminals and Neighboring HC Dendrites Show Similar
Degrees of Decorrelation
(A–F) Exemplary neighboring cone axon terminals in the HR2. 1:TN-XL retina (A) and HC dendritic processes in the Cx57+/cre 3 Ai38 retina (D) with respective Ca2+
signals (C and F) in response to 25-Hz colored noise (STAR Methods), with threshold (red line) used to detect negative events.  Correlation of events for exemplary
cones and HCs are shown in (B) and (E). 
(legend continued on next page)
Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017 3609
dendritic morphology supports electrical isolation of distal tips
and, thereby, local signaling. 
Local HC Feedback May Shape Temporal Properties of
Cone Responses
Finally, we assessed the effect of local HC feedback on the
cone response.  We presented a 60-Hz full-ﬁeld binary noise
stimulus to slices prepared from HR2. 1:TN-XL mice (Figures
6A and 6C) and iGluSnFR-transduced C57BL/6J mice (Figures
6B and 6D) (STAR Methods; [37]).  We estimated time kernels of
Ca2+ signals in cones and glutamate signals in the OPL as
described above (cf.  Figure 4).  The averaged time kernels
were more transient for iGluSnFR in comparison to those for
Ca2+ (Figure 6E), likely reﬂecting differences in signalversus glutamate) and biosensor kinetics (tdecayz200 ms for
TN-XL versus 92 ms for iGluSnFR; [22]).  For further analysis,
we computed the periodograms of the time kernels using
discrete Fourier transforms [14], and we examined the difference in their power spectral density for each frequency component
(STAR Methods; Figure 6F).  We ﬁrst performed two
consecutive recordings with an interval of 5 min as controls. 
No signiﬁcant differences were found between controls for
time kernels from both cone Ca2+ (n = 61 ROIs, 11 slices,
3 mice) and glutamate release (n = 76/15/3).  Next, we deprived
HCs from their input by bath application of NBQX, and we assessed the effect on the time kernels and their corresponding
periodograms for cone Ca2+ (n = 48/15/3) and glutamate
release (n = 47/18/3).  Although the time kernels looked narrower after NBQX application, no signiﬁcant differences were
found between these kernels with respect to time to peak
and FArea.  However, the analysis of the periodograms revealed
a signiﬁcant reduction of the power spectral density at low fre 4, dependent samples
quencies (cone Ca2+, at 1 Hz, p = 3$10
 7, at 1 Hz,
t test; glutamate release, at 0 Hz, p = 3. 2$10
 5), indicating that local HC feedback contributes
p = 4. 7$10
to temporal shaping of cone output by increasing the sensitivity
of the cone signal to low-frequency signal components. 
<Conclusion> DISCUSSION. 
HCs are traditionally thought to play a role in global processing
and to provide lateral inhibition, e. g. , for contrast enhancement
(reviewed in [19]).  Recent studies, however, suggest the existence of a local processing mode, in which HCs provide locally
tailored feedback to individual cones [14, 18], reminiscent of
the local dendritic processing in amacrine cells (e. g. , [4]). 
Here we recorded light stimulus-evoked pre- and postsynaptic activity at the cone-HC synapse in the mouse retina, and
we present three lines of evidence supporting that mouse HCs
can process cone input in a highly local and independent
manner.  First, neighboring dendritic tips, which presumably contact neighboring cones, differed in their chromatic preferences. 
While the ubiquitous GCaMP3 expression in HCs did not allow
us to assign ROIs to individual HCs, it is unlikely that our data
are solely explained by recording two overlapping kinds of
HCs with opposite spectral preference, simply because mice
feature only one type of HC, which indiscriminately contacts all
cones within its dendritic ﬁeld [29, 38].  Second, the correlation
levels of Ca2+ signals measured in neighboring HC dendritic
tips were similar to those recorded in neighboring cone axon terminals.  If cone inputs were already averaged at the level of the
distal HC dendrite, we would have expected an increase in correlation from cones to HCs.  Hence, our correlation data support
local signaling (and possibly processing) in HC dendritic tips. 
Third, a simple, biophysically realistic model conﬁrms that the
HC morphology supports electrical isolation between dendriticBy isolating HCs pharmacologically from their cone input, we
showed that the HC feedback may shape the temporal ﬁltering
properties of the cone synapse, i. e. , by modulating the power
at low-stimulus frequencies.  Taken together, our study extends
the traditional view of global HC signaling by a powerful local
component, indicating that dendritic processing already happens at the ﬁrst synapse of the retina. 
Local versus Global HC Feedback
Byzov and Shura-Bura [39] were ﬁrst to suggest that HCs provide local feedback to cones.  Following experimental conﬁrmation, it was then proposed that both local and global feedback
are triggered by the activation of AMPA/KA receptors on HCs
[18], but with local feedback being mediated by the local Ca2+
in the dendritic tip and global feedback relying on depolarization
and possibly ampliﬁcation by VGCCs [40].  While we did not ﬁnd
interactions between distal HC dendrites, the mixing of S- and
M-signals we observed in proximal HC dendrites hints at some
degree of global signal integration.  We cannot exclude the possibility that the slice preparation introduces a bias toward local
signaling; however, earlier work in rabbit HCs suggests that local
feedback suffers more from slicing than global feedback [18]. 
Furthermore, more global-scale interactions have been successfully demonstrated in mouse retinal slices; these include,
for instance, lateral inhibition between cones [12] and electrical
coupling within the AII amacrine cell network [41].  Global signal
integration within the HC network requires Cx57-mediated
gap-junction coupling [17].  In the Cx57+/cre 3 Ai38 mice used
here, one Cx57 allele is replaced by a cre gene, resulting in a
reduced Cx57 expression.  The HCs in these mice feature smaller
receptive ﬁelds (RFs) and elevated resting potentials; but, since
HC coupling is intact and cone-HC synapses seem unaltered
[42], we do not expect this genetic modiﬁcation to substantially
affect our conclusions. 
Mechanism(s) of Local Ca2+ Signaling in HC Dendrites
What is the cellular basis of the local Ca2+ signaling we observed
in HC dendrites? In line with previous studies [28, 29, 31], we
show that these signals are mediated by a combination of
(G and H) Average correlation per ﬁeld for events only (G) and full Ca2+ traces (H) for cones and HCs in response to green, UV, and white (GUW) light (cones, n = 6
ﬁelds; HCs, n = 60 ﬁelds) and to colored noise (cones, n = 65 ﬁelds; HCs, n = 57 ﬁelds). 
(I and J) Normalized time kernels of green ROIs (amplitude green kernel > 2 SD noise, left), UV ROIs (amplitude UV kernel > 2 SD noise, middle), and mixed ROIs
(amplitude green and UV kernel > 2 SD noise, right) for cones (I) and HCs (J) (with 2 SD in gray).  **p % 0. 01 and ***p % 0. 001.  Scale bars, 5 mm. 
See also Figures S4 and S5 and Table S2. 
3610 Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017
Figure 5.  Dendritic Morphology of HCs Supports Electrical Isolation of Dendritic Tips
(A) Reconstruction of an HC dendrite.  Distal tips (orange) that invaginate cone axon terminals are numbered (1–10).  Dataset from [36]. 
(B and C) Voltage (B) and resulting Ca2+ level (C) measured in all cone-contacting HC tips as a function of distance from the current-injected tip. 
(D) Voltage distribution across the branch after current injection into HC tip 3. 
(E) Voltage drop along the dendrite between injected tip (from D) and soma. 
(F) Simulated voltage responses to green/UV/white light ﬂashes measured in two HC tips (1 and 2, contacting a green and a UV cone, respectively) and the soma. 
Inset: branch with connected cones (colored by spectral preference, which is also given in brackets) is shown. 
Scale bar in (A), 10 mm. 
Ca2+-permeable AMPA/KA-type glutamate receptors, VGCCs,
and Ca2+ released from stores.  This combination is reminiscent
of another reciprocal synapse with local signaling, the synapse
between rod bipolar cells (RBCs) and A17 amacrine cells [43]. 
Here, Ca2+ enters a dendritic amacrine cell (AC) varicosity via
AMPA receptors and triggers GABA release, with the necessary
ampliﬁcation of the Ca2+ signal generated by Ca2+-induced Ca2+
release from stores.  To keep the signal from spreading to neighboring varicosities, A17 cells express Ca2+-activated potassium
(BK) channels that hyperpolarize the varicosity and suppress the
activation of VGCCs.  In addition, varicosities are spaced with an
average distance of 20 mm along the dendrite to increase electrical isolation. 
Local signaling in HCs may employ a similar mechanism.  (1)
As shown for several species, local HC feedback can be triggered by AMPA receptor activation without requiring VGCCs
[18].  If this is also true for mouse HCs is still unclear.  The
Ca2+ signals evoked by AMPA/KA puffs mainly involved
L-type VGCCs and Ca2+ stores; but, for weaker, more physiological stimuli (i. e. , light), the direct contribution of AMPA/KA
receptors to the Ca2+ signals may be greater, as it seems to
be the case in A17 cells [43].  Moreover, activity of VGCCs in
HCs is suppressed by dopamine, which is released in a lightdependent
fashion [44], suggesting that VGCCs contribute
less to the Ca2+ signal under our light conditions.  (2) HCs express BK channels that limit membrane depolarization in a
voltage- and Ca2+-dependent manner [45].  (3) Ca2+ signals in
HC dendrites partially rely on Ca2+ stores [28].  (4) The HC
morphology enhances electrical
isolation between dendritic
tips, as supported by our modeling data. 
Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017 3611
Figure 6.  Local HC Feedback Modulates Temporal Properties of Cone Response
(A–D) Exemplary ROIs of cone axon terminals, deﬁned by TN-XL expression (A) or by iGluSnFR activity (B; STAR Methods), with respective temporal receptive
ﬁeld kernels calculated from response to a full-ﬁeld 60-Hz binary noise stimulus (raw traces in C and D; STAR Methods) for control condition (black traces in A–D)
and during bath application of NBQX (green traces in A–D). 
(E) Normalized time kernels for cone Ca2+ (upper panel) and glutamate release (lower panel) for control condition (ctr1, ctr2; left) and with NBQX (right) (cone Ca2+:
ctr, n = 61 ROIs; NBQX, n = 48 ROIs; cone glutamate release: ctr, n = 76 ROIs; NBQX, n = 47 ROIs; shaded areas indicate 1 SD). 
(F) Periodograms (STAR Methods) generated from cone kernels (E) using a discrete Fourier transform: cone Ca2+ (upper panel) and glutamate release (lower
 5, Bonferroni-corrected signiﬁcance
panel) for control condition (left) and with NBQX (right) (shaded areas indicate 1 SD) (++p % 6. 66$10
threshold).  Scale bars, 2. 5 mm. 
 4 and +++p % 6. 66$10
Do Rods Contribute to the Ca2+ Signals in HC Dendrites?
The transgenic mouse expresses GCaMP3 in all HC compartments, and because dendritic and axonal HC processes are intermingled, we could not distinguish them solely based on their
morphological appearance.  Yet, our conclusions rely on the
assumption that the measured Ca2+ signals reﬂect cone input
and that rod input (either mediated by direct rod-HC contacts
or by rod-cone coupling) can be neglected.  We think that this
was the case for three reasons.  (1) We measured the largest
Ca2+ signals at the OPL level where HC dendrites invaginate
the cone axon terminal base [19, 27].  (2) The chromatic tuning
of these Ca2+ signals reﬂected the local ratio of S- versus
3612 Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017
M-opsin expression along the retina’s dorsoventral axis.  If rods
had substantially responded to either UV or green, we would
have expected an additional UV response in dorsal HCs and/or
an additional green response in ventral HCs.  (3) Laser-evoked
photoreceptor excitation alone generated a background illumination equivalent to 104 P*$s
 1/cone (STAR Methods; [32]),
which is probably similar in rods [25].  Electrical recordings
from mouse rods in slices indicate that rod photoresponses
disappear at 104 P*$s
 1/rod [46], suggesting that rods were
not operational under our stimulation conditions.  Our earlier
ﬁnding that RBCs respond to light-on stimuli under similar conditions [37] may be explained by direct (or indirect) cone input
to RBCs, as in mice 70% of the RBCs contact at least one
cone [47], and cones and rods are at least weakly coupled at
our light levels [48]. 
Functional Consequences of Local Dendritic Processing
for HC Feedback to Cones
What could be the purpose of local HC feedback to cones? Our
pharmacological data indicate that (local) HC feedback boosts
low-frequency signals in the cone output, consistent with a
general role of HC feedback in dynamically shaping/adapting
the time course of cone transmission, e. g. , as a function of
stimulus conﬁguration (e. g. , center versus surround stimulation;
[49, 50]).  Speciﬁcally, our ﬁnding is consistent with earlier work
showing that activation of HCs (by a dark annular stimulus)
shifts the frequency sensitivity of an HC in the stimulus center
toward lower frequencies [51].  That we could not also ﬁnd a
shift at higher frequencies may well be due to temporal
limthe imaging system and the biosensors
itations both of
(cf.  Results). 
In theory, the objective of sensory neurons is often considered to be the relative enhancement of relevant information
content from a sensory input, given a limited metabolic capacity [52].  Adaptational mechanisms allow the circuitry to robustly
meet this objective despite changing natural scene statistics
[53], whether by enhancing features (increasing information
content) or removing redundancy (reducing metabolic cost). 
For HCs, these elements have typically been considered for
adaptation to spatial properties, through mechanisms such as
the center-surround RF and background luminance subtraction.  Here, the local adaptation we observed appears to operate in the time domain; the effect is made visible by changes
in sensitivity to (at least but probably not solely) low-frequency
components, which might convey little information content in
natural scenes where they are strongly present and more information otherwise.  In this sense, local feedback may serve temporal contrast enhancement.  That the feedback can occur at
the level of individual photoreceptors is perhaps not surprising,
as such a cell driven in isolation is still subject to trade-offs in
information and metabolic cost.  In natural scenes, spatial and
temporal statistics are not independent, and the interplay between their
respective adaptational mechanisms, such as
here the potential interplay between local and global feedback
mechanisms in HCs, is an attractive subject for further study
(see discussion in [19]).  A promising approach to tackle these
questions may be a combination of voltage biosensors [54] to
probe the voltage distribution across an HC’s dendritic arbor
with biophysically realistic models. 
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Animals
d METHOD DETAILS
B Retinal tissue preparation
B Virus injection
B Two-photon imaging
B Light stimulation
B Immunohistochemistry
B Pharmacology and drug application
B Data analysis
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes ﬁve ﬁgures and two tables and can be
found with this article online at https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 050. 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
C. A. C. , T. S. , and T. E.  designed the study.  C. A. C.  and S. P.  established the
experimental approach.  C. A. C.  performed experiments and pre-processing. 
C. A. C.  analyzed the data with input from T. S. , T. B. , L. E. R. , P. B. , and T. E. 
C. B.  generated and analyzed the model with input from T. S. , P. B. , and T. E. 
C. A. C. , T. S. , T. E. , and L. E. R.  wrote the manuscript with input from P. B. ,
C. B. , and T. B. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (EXC 307,
CIN to T. E.  and T. S. , SCHU 2243/3-1 to T. S. , and BE5601/1-1 to P. B. ) and the
German Ministry of Science and Education (BMBF) through the Bernstein
Award to P. B.  (FKZ: 01GQ1601).  We thank G.  Eske for excellent technical
assistance and K.  Franke for performing the intravitreal virus injection,
Y.  Zhang for tracing the HC dendrite, and R. G.  Smith for help in setting up
the NeuronC model.  We thank L. L.  Looger, the Janelia Research CampusInstitute, and the Genetically Encoded
Neuronal Indicator and Effector (GENIE) Project for making the viral construct
AAV9. hSyn. iGluSnFR. WPRE. SV40 publicly available. 
the Howard Hughes Medical
Received: June 12, 2017
Revised: September 1, 2017
Accepted: October 19, 2017
Published: November 22, 2017
REFERENCES
1.  Denk, W. , Sugimori, M. , and Llina´ s, R.  (1995).  Two types of calcium
response limited to single spines in cerebellar Purkinje cells.  Proc.  Natl. 
Acad.  Sci.  USA 92, 8279–8282. 
2.  Branco, T. , Clark, B. A. , and H€ausser, M.  (2010).  Dendritic discriminainput sequences in cortical neurons.  Science 329,
tion of temporal
1671–1675. 
3.  Branco, T. , Staras, K. , Darcy, K. J. , and Goda, Y.  (2008).  Local dendritic
activity sets release probability at hippocampal synapses.  Neuron 59,
475–485. 
Current Biology 27, 3603–3615, December 4, 2017 3613
4.  Grimes, W. N. , Zhang, J. , Graydon, C. W. , Kachar, B. , and Diamond, J. S. 
(2010).  Retinal parallel processors: more than 100 independent microcircuits operate within a single interneuron.  Neuron 65, 873–885. 
24.  Szel, A. , Ro¨ hlich, P. , Caffe, A. R. , Juliusson, B. , Aguirre, G. , and Van Veen,
T.  (1992).  Unique topographic separation of two spectral classes of cones
in the mouse retina.  J.  Comp.  Neurol.  325, 327–342. 
5.  Euler, T. , Detwiler, P. B. , and Denk, W.  (2002).  Directionally selective calcium signals in dendrites of starburst amacrine cells.  Nature 418, 845–852. 