
Alexithymia is a personality trait involving deﬁcits in emotional processing.  The personality construct has been
extensively validated, but the underlying neural and physiological systems remain controversial.  One theory
suggests that low-level somatosensory mechanisms act as somatic markers of emotion, underpinning cognitive
and aﬀective impairments in alexithymia.  In two separate samples (total N = 100), we used an established
Quantitative Sensory Testing (QST) battery to probe multiple neurophysiological submodalities of somatosensation, and investigated their associations with the widely-used Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20). 
Experiment one found reduced sensitivity to warmth in people with higher alexithymia scores, compared to
individuals with lower scores, without deﬁcits in other somatosensory submodalities.  Experiment two replicated
this result in a new group of participants using a full-sample correlation between threshold for warm detection
and TAS-20 scores.  We discuss the relations between low-level thermoceptive function and cognitive processing
of emotion. 
Alexithymia is a multifaceted personality construct, expressed with
varying intensity in the general population.  Self-report measures like
the Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS) (Bagby, Parker, & Taylor, 1994),
the most widely used and well-validated assessment tool (Bagby Name,
1994; Parker, Michael Bagby, Taylor, Endler, & Schmitz, 2003) characterise alexithymia through three main facets: diﬃculties in identifying feelings (DIF), diﬃculties in describing feelings (DDF), and externally-oriented thinking or a preoccupation with the details of
external events (EOT).  Dimensional analysis suggest alexithymia comprises an aﬀective dimension, involving emotionalizing, and fantasizing, and a cognitive dimension, involving identifying, diﬀerentiatingBruce, Martens,
Aleman, & Hooker, 2014; Herbert, Herbert, & Pollatos, 2011; Parker,
Keefer, Taylor, & Bagby, 2008; Taylor, Bagby, & Parker, 1991).  Importantly, people with high levels of alexithymia exhibit diﬃculties not
only in processing their own emotions, but also in processing the
emotions
Borgomaneri,
Làdavas, & Bertini, 2016; Jessimer & Markham, 1997; Parker Name,Di
Prkachin, & Prkachin,
Scarpazza,
expressed
describing
feelings
(Goerlich-Dobre,by(Borhani,Pellegrino, & Làdavas, 2014; Sifneos, 1973).  Thus, alexithymic individuals show altered recognition of emotional stimuli (Grynberg
Name, 2012; Ihme Name, 2014) and decreased activation of the amygdala during presentation of emotional stimuli (Jongen Name, 2014;
Moriguchi & Komaki, 2013), and particularly negative stimuli (Kugel
Name, 2008; Pouga, Berthoz, de Gelder, & Grezes, 2010; Reker Name,
2010; for a recent metaanalysis: van der Velde Name, 2013). 