
Important clues to retrosplenial cortex (areas 29, 30) function come
from its connectivity.  This posterior cingulate region has dense interconnections with the anterior thalamic nuclei, as well as with hippocampal and parahippocampal regions [1–6].  Reﬂecting these connections, the rat retrosplenial cortex contributes to spatial memory and
navigation [7–12].  Despite these ﬁndings, it is clear that the retrosplenial cortex has a very diﬀerent role in spatial cognition from that of
the hippocampus and anterior thalamic nuclei.  Indeed, retrosplenial
lesion deﬁcits often only emerge when animals are required to switch
ﬂexibly between diﬀerent spatial strategies or competing cue types
[13–15].  Such evidence potentially points to a broader role for the
retrosplenial cortex in cognition beyond the spatial domain.  A consideration of its other anatomical connections is consistent with this
proposal.  Retrosplenial cortex is also heavily interconnected with the
anterior cingulate cortex [16–18] which, in turn, is closely connected
with other frontal areas, including prelimbic cortex [19].  Retrosplenial
cortex is also indirectly linked with prelimbic cortex via its dense
anterior thalamic and medial thalamic connections [16,19].  Yet, the
functional importance of these retrosplenial-frontal connections remains poorly understood. 
The present study, therefore, addressed the question of whether
retrosplenial cortex contributes to functions associated with the rodent
anterior cingulate and prelimbic cortices.  Preliminary support for this
view comes from the ﬁnding that retrosplenial cortex lesions disrupt a
rodent analogue of the Stroop task [20], which is also sensitive to
medial frontal cortex lesions [21].  In addition, retrosplenial cortex lesions can disrupt recency judgements [22], an ability closely associated
with medial frontal cortex function in rats [23–25] as well as crossmodal recognition memory [26,27]. 
To provide a more comprehensive answer, rats with retrosplenial
cortex lesions were tested on a series of four behavioural tasks thought
to rely on either the prelimbic cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, or both
cortical areas.  In Experiment 1, rats with retrosplenial cortex lesions
performed an attentional set-shifting task, previously shown to be
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: Powellal3@cf. ac. uk (A. L.  Powell). 
1 Anna Powell and Andrew Nelson are joint ﬁrst authors. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 010
Received 25 May 2017; Received in revised form 25 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 08 August 2017
0166-4328/ © 2017 The Authors.  Published by Elsevier B. V.  This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons. org/licenses/BY/4. 0/). 
A. L.  Powell Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
Fig.  1.  Set-shifting task (Experiment 1).  (A) Schematic of the arena used for the set-shifting experiment.  Approximately one third of the length of the box was divided into two smaller
compartments.  The remaining area of the box was a single open space.  The two smaller sections could be separated from the larger area by a removable black Perspex panel.  A glass pot
(depicted by the clear circles) containing the digging medium was placed in each of the two smaller areas.  A third identical glass pot containing water was placed against the opposite wall
of the larger area (depicted by the “W”).  (B) Examples of possible stimulus pairings for each stage of the attentional set-shifting task.  A rewarded stimulus is indicated with + while −
indicates the nonrewarded stimulus in each pair.  Abbreviations: extra, extradimensional shift; intra, intradimensional shift. 
sensitive to lesions centred in prelimbic cortex [28].  These medial
frontal lesions produce a selective deﬁcit on extradimensional setshifting, the ability to switch from one class of reinforced cues to another [28], while more selective anterior cingulate lesions can impair
intradimensional set-shifting [29].  The latter experiment also examined
the retrosplenial (posterior cingulate) cortex, ﬁnding that restricted
lesions centred on mid anterior-posterior levels within the area can also
retard intradimensional shifts [29].  In Experiment 2, a second cohort of
rats with retrosplenial lesions was tested on a strategy switch task in an
automated chamber.  This task involved learning and then shifting between visual-based and response-based discriminations, switches that
are sensitive to inactivation of the medial frontal cortex in rats (Ragozzino Name [31]; Floresco Name [30]).  Both Experiments 1 and 2
included a reversal stage as this form of behavioural change can be
dissociated from shifting attention from one domain to another [28,32]. 
Lesions in the anterior cingulate cortex impair eﬀort-based decision
making, whilst other medial frontal cortex lesions can spare such tasks
[33].  We, therefore, trained the cohort of rats from Experiment 2 on an
operant cost-beneﬁt discrimination task (Experiment 3).  Such tasks pit
reward size against the eﬀort required to gain that reward [34].  Finally,
a third cohort of rats with retrosplenial lesions was trained on reinforced matching-to-place in a T-maze (Experiment 4).  Rats with
prelimbic cortex lesions show impaired acquisition as they persist with
the dominant preference to nonmatch and then spend longer resorting
to a side preference, before learning to match [35,36].  Anterior cingulate lesions also extend the period of nonmatching, but the animals
then switch at a rapid rate once that innate tendency has extinguished
[35].  Taken together, the various behavioural tasks were selected to
determine whether retrosplenial cortex lesions have eﬀects similar to
those seen after lesions in the anterior cingulate or prelimbic cortices. 
<Middle> Experiment 1: attentional set–shifting. 
The ﬁrst experiment consisted of a series of discriminations that
were completed in a single session [37,38].  The initial discriminations
helped to establish within-dimensional attention (intradimensional
shifts), while subsequent discriminations involved an extradimensional
shift, followed by a reversal of the preceding discrimination. 
2. 1.  Methods
2. 1. 1.  Subjects
Experiment 1 involved a single cohort (Cohort 1) of 28 male Lister
hooded rats (Harlan, Bicester, UK) weighing between 278 and 387 g at
the time of surgery.  Animals were housed in pairs under diurnal light
conditions (14 h light/10 h dark).  Behavioural testing occurred during
the light phase.  The rats were handled daily for a week prior to surgery
and then randomly assigned to one of two surgical groups: retrosplenial
cortex lesions (RSC1, n = 16) or surgical shams (Sham1, n = 12).  All
procedures were in accordance with the UK Animals (Scientiﬁc
Procedures) Act, 1986 and EU directive (2010/63/EU), as well as being
approved by local ethical committees at Cardiﬀ University.  Prior to
Experiment 1, the rats had been tested on a spatial discrimination task
and a spontaneous object recognition task [39].  The current experiment
began eight months after surgery. 
2. 1. 2.  Surgical proceduresinjection of 0. 1 ml Millophylline
Prior to surgery, rats received a subcutaneous injection of 0. 06 ml
Metacam (Boehringer Ingelheim, Alkmaar, NL, USA) and an intraperitoneal
(Arnolds
Veterinary Products Ltd, Shrewsbury, UK).  They were then deeply anaesthetised with an i. p.  injection of sodium pentobarbital (60 mg/kg
pentobarbital sodium salt; Sigma-Aldrich, U. K. ).  The rat was placed in a
stereotaxic frame with the nose bar at +5. 0 (David Kopf Instruments,
Tujunga, CA, USA).  The scalp was retracted and the cortex along the
midline exposed by a bilateral craniotomy, extending from bregma toLesions were produced by injecting 0. 09 M N-methyl-D-aspartate
solution (NMDA; Sigma, Poole, UK), dissolved in phosphate buﬀer (pH
7. 2), into seven bilateral injection sites via a 1 μl Hamilton syringe at a
rate of 0. 05 μl per minute (Bonaduz, Switzerland).  The injection coordinates were measured from bregma along the anterior-posterior (AP)
axis, from the central sinus along the lateral-medial (LM) axis, and from
the surface of the cortex for the dorsal-ventral (DV) axis.  The stereotaxic coordinates at each of the seven sites were as follows: AP −1. 6,
LM ± 0. 4, DV-1. 3; AP-2. 8, LM ± 0. 5, DV-1. 3; AP-4. 0, LM ± 0. 5,
DV-1. 3; AP-5. 3, LM ± 0. 5, DV-2. 6; AP-5. 3, LM ± 0. 9, DV-1. 6; AP-6. 6,
LM ± 1. 0, DV-2. 0; AP-7. 5, LM ± 1. 1, DV-1. 3.  The three most rostral
coordinates received injections of 0. 25 μl NMDA, the next three pairs of
sites received 0. 26 μl, with 0. 1 μl NMDA in the most caudal site. A. L.  Powell Name
2. 1. 3.  Apparatus
Rats were tested in an opaque, black Perspex box (69. 5 cm long x
40. 5 cm wide x 18. 6 cm deep).  The box was divided into two smaller
compartments along approximately one third of its length, with the
remaining area creating a single open space (Fig.  1A).  Removable
opaque Perspex panels controlled access to the two smaller sections
from the larger area.  Each of the three sections was covered by a separate, hinged transparent Perspex lid.  A glass pot (75 mm in diameter,
45 mm deep), containing the digging media, was placed in each of the
two smaller areas.  Given the duration of the test session, a third identical pot, containing water, was placed against the wall of the larger
area, furthest from the digging chambers (see Fig.  1A).  Rats were carried to and from the testing room in individual, opaque boxes. 
2. 1. 4.  Behavioural training
2. 1. 4. 1.  Pre-training.  Three days prior
to testing, each rat was
habituated to the full test arena for 10 min (no glass pots were
present).  On the second pre-training day, rats were returned to the
arena for another 10 min.  Now, both the smaller chambers were closed
oﬀ by the removable panels and the three glass pots were in place.  The
animal was initially placed in the larger chamber and the dividing
panels were raised and lowered at intervals (approximately every
2 min).  During this session both of the pots in the smaller chambers
(i. e. , the digging pots) were ﬁlled with clean bedding sawdust and
baited with half a Cheerio (Nestle, UK) and rats were trained to retrieve
the food from the pots.  Note that this stage was acquired relatively
quickly because all the animals had been previously trained on a similar
task [12].  The day before testing, rats were again placed in the arena
and pre-exposed to each of the test stimuli in turn.  Odours were mixed
with bedding sawdust and all
the diﬀerent digging media were
presented without odours added.  For all stimulus presentations, rats
were required to retrieve a buried Cheerio from each pot. 
2. 1. 4. 2.  Test.  On the Test Day, rats received a series of two-choice
(forced) discriminations in which only one stimulus dimension (i. e. ,
odour or texture; counterbalanced across rats) signalled reinforcement
(see Fig.  1B for examples).  Each rat completed all discriminations in a
single session.  For each discrimination, the two digging pots contained
diﬀerent media and/or odours and a single cheerio was placed in one of
the two pots.  The location of the reinforced pot (i. e. , in the left or right
chamber) was pseudo-randomly allocated across trials. 
At the start of each trial, a rat was placed in the large compartment
with the dividing doors restricting access to the both of the smaller
chambers.  A trial started once these doors were removed and the rat
had 10 min to ﬁnd the reward.  A ‘choice’ was deﬁned as the rat
breaking the surface of the digging medium with its paws or nose.  If the
rat chose the non-reinforced pot, the trial was marked as incorrect.  For
the ﬁrst four trials of each stage, if a rat made an incorrect choice, it was
allowed access to the correct pot to uncover the reward.  On subsequent
incorrect trials (i. e. , digging in a nonbaited pot), the trial was terminated once the rat returned to the large waiting area of the arena.  The
pots were re-baited during a 5 s ITI period.  A rat did not move onto the
next discrimination stage until it had reached a criterion of six correct
choices in a row.  Trials were scored by an experimenter blind to the
group identify of the rat. 
For the initial, simple discrimination (SD), the digging pots were
ﬁlled with either sawdust infused with two diﬀerent scents or with two
diﬀerent digging media (without odour).  Only one odour (or one
medium) was reinforced.  In the subsequent, complex discrimination
(CD) stage, the same odour or texture as for the simple discrimination
trials was reinforced, but now the irrelevant dimension, texture or
odour respectively, was also added (see Fig.  1B). 
The next four stages consisted of intradimensional training (ID1,
ID2, ID3, and ID4) in which diﬀerent compound stimuli were presented
for each discrimination, with the relevant dimension (i. e. , odour or
texture) remaining constant.  Thus, for the ﬁrst six stages of the task (SD,
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 88–102
CD, ID1, ID2, ID3, and ID4) the rats were required to attend to only one
stimulus dimension, while ignoring the other non-reinforced dimension
(see Fig.  1B).  This training was designed to encourage the formation of
an attentional set (i. e. , always attend to one dimension and ignore the
other, irrelevant dimension). 
After the fourth intradimensional discrimination (ID4), an extradimensional (ED) shift was introduced.  Again, diﬀerent compound stimuli were presented, however, now the previously irrelevant dimension
was reinforced (see Fig.  1B).  Consequently, rats had to attend to a
diﬀerent dimension in order to solve the discrimination.  Finally, the
reward contingencies established during the ED task were reversed
(REV) such that the previously non-reinforced stimulus was now reinforced and vice versa (see Fig.  1B). 
2. 1. 5.  Histology
After behavioural testing, rats were deeply anaesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (60 mg/kg, i. p. ; Euthatal; Merial Animal Health,
Harlow, UK) and transcardially perfused with 0. 1 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0. 1 M PBS
(PFA).  The brains were removed and placed in PFA for 4 h before being
transferred to 25% sucrose overnight at room temperature, with gentle
agitation.  A one-in-four series of coronal sections (40 μm) was cut on a
freezing microtome and stained using the Nissl stain, cresyl violet. 
Descriptions of the rat retrosplenial cortex follow those of van Groen
and Wyss [3,40,41].  In this nomenclature, the dysgranular cortex (area
30) is designated Rdg, while the granular cortex (area 29) is subdivided
into a more dorsal area, Rgb and a more ventral, caudal area, Rga [3]. 
2. 1. 6.  Data analysisto criterion were
analysed using mixed ANOVAs. 
Discrimination “Stage” (eight levels) provided a repeated-measures
factor, while “Group” was the between-subjects factor. 