
Several studies suggest that inhibition diﬃculties among people with ASD might be related to atypical cardiac
vagal control.  We examined how low versus high baseline heart rate variability (HRV) inﬂuences prepotent
response inhibition in 31 males with autism spectrum disorder (ASD; mean age: 32. 2; mean IQ: 107. 8) compared
to 39 typically developing (TD) males (mean age: 30. 5; mean IQ: 102. 0) by administering a stop signal task. 
Moreover, we examined whether adding an aﬀective manipulation would alter ﬁndings and whether this manipulation aﬀected HRV.  Findings indicated that baseline HRV inﬂuenced inhibition in ASD males.  Speciﬁcally,
an ASD subgroup with low baseline HRV performed signiﬁcantly worse compared to an ASD subgroup with high
baseline HRV.  No inﬂuence of baseline HRV was found in TD males.  The aﬀective manipulation did negatively
inﬂuence performance and also altered HRV.  Although replication is required, these ﬁrst ﬁndings indicate that
baseline cardiac vagal control seems to aﬀect inhibitory control in males with ASD. resistanceresponse
inhibition
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental disorders, characterized by social interaction and communication diﬃculties as well as repetitive behaviors (APA, 2013).  Both repetitive
behaviors and social interaction diﬃculties have been theorized to be
related to inhibitory control deﬁciencies (e. g. , Bachevalier & Loveland,
2006; Hill, 2004; Mosconi Name, 2009; Russel, 1997).  Three types of
inhibitory control can be identiﬁed, namely interference control, prepotent
interference
(Friedman & Miyake, 2004).  Prepotent response inhibition and interference control are the two most studied types of inhibition in the ASD
population.  Prepotent response inhibition is the ability to suppress or
withhold a (motor) response.  Interference control is the ability to ignore
irrelevant stimuli.  Although recent meta-analyses conﬁrm that people
with ASD have more prepotent response inhibition (Cohen’s d = 0. 55;
Hedges’g = 0. 51) and interference control (Cohen’s d = 0. 31) diﬃculties than typically developing (TD) individuals, both meta-analyses
also found a large amount of heterogeneity (Geurts, van den
Bergh & Ruzzano, 2014; Kuiper, Verhoeven & Geurts, 2016).  This means
that the ﬁndings across studies were inconsistent. 
This large amount of heterogeneity between inhibitory control
study ﬁndings in people with ASD suggests that there are other factors
that inﬂuence these ﬁndings.  In the two aforementioned meta-analyses,
we examined several possible factors, namely the possible inﬂuence of
age, intelligence (IQ), interstimulus interval (ISI) and ‘stimulus type’
(Geurts Name, 2014; Kuiper Name, 2016).  In the ﬁrst meta-analysis, age
explained 25% of the heterogeneity between the studies on prepotent
response inhibition, but a signiﬁcant amount of heterogeneity still remained.  Age was not a relevant moderator for interference control.  IQ
showed the opposite pattern as it had no eﬀect on prepotent response
inhibition, but did explain 62% of the heterogeneity between the interference control studies (Geurts Name, 2014).  In the second metaanalysis, which solely focused on prepotent response inhibition, the
possible inﬂuence of variations in ISI and ‘stimulus type’ as well as the
factors age and IQ were examined (Kuiper Name, 2016).  Age, IQ and ISI
did not signiﬁcantly reduce the heterogeneity between the studies.  The
inﬂuence of ‘stimulus type’ was systematically reviewed and showed
mixed results.  It seemed to depend on the type of stimulus whether or
not it inﬂuenced inhibition.  We hypothesized that perhaps the stimulus
types have diﬀerent physiological eﬀects and that more studies were
needed that include two diﬀerent sets of stimuli as well as physiological
measures to be able to directly measure the (physiological) inﬂuence of
a stimulus type on inhibitory control in people with ASD.  The reason
behind why there was a non-signiﬁcant eﬀect of age found in the
second meta-analysis (Kuiper Name, 2016) compared to the signiﬁcant
⁎ Corresponding author at: Dr.  Leo Kannerhuis, Houtsniplaan 1, 6865 XZ Doorwerth, The Netherlands. 
E-mail addresses: kuiper. marieke@gmail. com, m. kuiper@leokannerhuis. nl (M. W. M.  Kuiper). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 006
Received 14 November 2016; Received in revised form 10 July 2017; Accepted 11 July 2017
Available online 15 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
M. W. M.  Kuiper Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 141–152
eﬀect in the ﬁrst meta-analysis (Geurts Name, 2014), was suggested to
be related to the smaller percentage of studies focusing on adults with
ASD, as this was 18. 9% and 26. 1% respectively.  Taken together, this
shows that there are other factors than age, IQ, and ISI that inﬂuence
inhibition in people with ASD.  Several authors have hypothesized that
cardiac vagal control might be one of these factors (e. g. , Geurts,
Begeer, & Stockmann,Kindt, & Forstmann, 2011; Raymaekers, van der Meere, & Roeyers,
2004; Raymaekers, van der Meere, & Roeyers, 2006; Raymaekers,
Antrop, van der Meere, Wiersema, & Roeyers, 2007). 
Krypotos,Jahfari,Cardiac vagal control refers to the degree of tonic vagal inﬂuences
on the heart.  The beat-to-beat heart rate (HR) of humans varies considerably (e. 