
Obstructive Sleep Apnea is a common prevalent disorder which is
associated with increased cardiovascular morbidities and mortality,
metabolic dysfunction and neurocognitive impairments [1].  With the
progress of OSA, patients will suﬀer from daytime sleepiness, depression, decline in memory, emotional disorders, cognitive loss, decline in
the ability of language understanding and expressing [2].  Intermittent
hypoxia (IH), as one of the major pathophysiological changes of OSA,
plays a signiﬁcant role in the processing of OSA [3].  Exposure to IH is
associated with neurodegenerative changes in addition to alterations in
brain regions and neurotransmitter systems involved in learning and
memory, attention, and locomotor activity.  Multiple pathophysiological
processes appear to be involved in the mechanistic aspects of the behavioral and neuronal susceptibility to IH, and include pathways
leading to increased oxidative stress and inﬂammation, altered gene
regulation, and decreases in the cellular and molecular substrates of
synaptic plasticity [4].  In addition, both environmental and genetic
factors modulate the end-organ susceptibility to IH-induced cognitive
dysfunction.  Collectively, the available data indicated that the cognitive
impairment could be the consequence of IH in the brain [5]. 
MicroRNA (miRNA) which is the endogenous non-coding singlestranded small molecule RNA has the capacity for blocking a number of
target genes and suppressing their translation [6].  Research on stroke
and brain injury found that regulating miRNA expression in brain could
alleviate the neuronal apoptosis and improve neurobehavioral functions [7–9].  Thus intervening the target genes through up/down-regulating the expression of target miRNA could be a potential way to
protect from cognitive impairment after IH.  It is important to analyse
the miRNA expression in rat hippocampus after chronic intermittent
hypoxia.  As far as we know, miRNA expression in rat hippocampus after
IH has not been reported yet.  In our study, we investigate the microarray based analysis of microRNA expression proﬁling in rat hippocampus after IH which could lay some foundation for future study of the
miRNA functional mechanism involved in the complex course of OSAreduced cognitive impairment. 
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Geriatrics, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin Geriatrics Institute, Tianjin, 300052, China. 
E-mail address: leiping1974@163. com (P.  Lei). 
1 Contributed equally to this work. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 06. 025
Received 7 November 2016; Received in revised form 10 June 2017; Accepted 15 June 2017
Available online 22 June 2017. 
0166-4328/ © 2017 Published by Elsevier B. V. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Animal model of intermittent hypoxia
Animal care and experiments were conducted in accordance with
the Policy of Animal Care and Use Committee of Tianjin Medical
University.  Male Sprague-Dawley rats (weight 280–300 g, 3 month-old)
were purchased from the Department Of Laboratory Animal Science
(Peking University Health Science Center).  The animals were housed on
a 12-h light/dark cycle in a temperature controlled animal facility with
food and water available ad libitum.  Animals were divided into four
groups (n = 12/group) for microarray, RT-PCR and western blot, including control (normoxia) group, IH 1 week group, IH 2 weeks group
and IH 4 weeks group.  Furthermore, we added 32 rats to detect spatial
learning and memory by MWM after IH 2 weeks and 4 weeks.  Rats
underwent intermittent hypoxia (IH) at a rate of 30 cycles/h (nadir 5%
O2 to peak 21% O2 with 0% CO2), or room air breathing (control) in
the same plastic cage placed next to the cage equipped with the IH
apparatus for 8 h/d during the “light on” period of 12 h.  In each cycle,
for the ﬁrst 30 s, the oxygen concentration inside was lowered to 5%
and maintained for 50 s, followed by an increase in the oxygen concentration to 21% for 40 s [10].  The IH rats were allowed free access to
food and water, while the amount of food for control rats was restricted
to adjust their average body weight comparable to that of the IH rats
every week. 
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 80–87
caspase-3 (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology), GAPDH (1:1000, Cell
Signaling Technology), Bcl-2 (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology) and
Bax (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology), all dissolved in TBST. 
Subsequently, blots were washed 3 times by TBST and incubated with
second antibody HRP goa tanti-rabbit
(1:1000, Cell Signaling
Technology) for 1 h at room temperature.  Protein bands were detected
with Immolilon Western chemiluminescent HRP substrate (Millipore,
USA).  Chemiluminesence was imaged in a Molecular Imager Chemi
Doc™ XRS + WB with Image Lab™ software (Bio-Rad, CA, USA), and
band intensity was measured by Image J software. 
2. 5.  MiRNA microarray analysis
We used Onearray (by Phalanx Biotech Group, china) to analysis the
miRNAs regulated after IH.  MiRNAs were enriched from total RNA
extracted using a mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit and labeled with a
mirVana Array Labeling Kit (Ambion).  The labeled miRNAs were used
for hybridization on each miRNA microarray, to determine the diﬀerential expression of miRNAs. 