
Opioid peptides have a long history of involvement in pain, reward,
and learning and memory.  Previous reports from our laboratory and
others have demonstrated that the general opioid antagonist naloxone,
impairs learning of many associative tasks such as delay conditioning,
operant lever-pressing behavior, fear conditioning, and trace eyeblink
conditioning [1–5].  In exploring the role for speciﬁc opioid receptors in
learning and memory, our laboratory has shown that antagonizing the
kappa-opioid receptor (KOR) impairs acquisition for the associative
paradigm whisker-trace eyeblink (WTEB) conditioning [6]. 
In WTEB conditioning a neutral conditioned stimulus (CS; Whisker
stimulation) is paired following a stimulus free trace interval with a
salient unconditioned stimulus that elicits an eye-blink (US; Eye shock). 
This paradigm has been shown to be dependent on, and induce plasticity in primary somatosensory cortex (S1), a likely site for memory
storage [7–10].  Our subsequent studies exploring the role of KOR with
learning have demonstrated that either systemic or direct S1 KOR inhibition impairs WTEB acquisition [6].  Consistent with our ﬁndings,
many studies have shown that KOR modulation can alter learning on
various tasks such as inhibitory avoidance, spontaneous alternation,
water-maze, radial-arm-maze, and conditioned place aversion [11–15]. 
These studies have strongly suggested that KOR plays a prominent role
in mediating various types of learning. 
KOR’s endogenous ligand and the most likely molecular trigger for
these eﬀects on learning is dynorphin.  Dynorphin is synthesized from
the precursor peptide prodynorphin (PD), which is synthesized in vesicles from the precursor preprodynorphin (PPD) [16].  Similar to KOR,
Dynorphin and its upstream precursors have been implicated in various
forms of learning.  For instance, PD knockout mice exhibit enhanced
levels of freezing in a contextual fear conditioning task [17].  Likewise,
dynorphin knockout mice display reduced age-related deﬁcits in water
⁎ Corresponding author at: Beckman Institute, 405 N.  Mathews Ave, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. 
E-mail addresses: RyanLoh2@illinois. edu (R.  Loh), Smcolli2@illinois. edu (S.  Collins), Rgalvez@illinois. edu (R.  Galvez). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 015
Received 14 June 2017; Received in revised form 31 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 09 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
R.  Loh Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 145–150
maze learning [18], while dynorphin injected directly into the hippocampus impairs water maze performance [19].  Although the speciﬁc
role of dynorphin and its precursors in learning appears to vary depending upon the tasks, these studies collectively suggest that they play
a prominent role in the acquisition and consolidation of learning tasks. 
Upon exploring the speciﬁc cell type expressing these peptides, it
has been demonstrated that the dynorphin precursor ligand PPD is
primarily found in Somatostatin-containing GABAergic interneurons
(SOM) within S1 [20].  These ﬁndings suggest that SOM interneurons
are a likely upstream cell of KOR activation in S1 with WTEB.  SOMs are
a major subclass of interneurons in the central nervous system that
serve a variety of roles in various species.  SOM cells represent a signiﬁcant proportion of all inhibitory interneurons in the neocortex [21]. 
Additionally, this population of cells is localized in areas important for
learning and memory, such as the neocortex and hippocampus [22],
two brain regions critically involved in WTEB acquisition [8,23,24].  In
S1, tonically-active SOM cells serve to inhibit neuronal activity, as
optogenetic silencing SOM cells causes an increase in ﬁring of pyramidal cells in the area.  SOM cells in S1 also receive input from vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)-containing inhibitory interneurons. 
Interestingly, during active whisking, VIP-containing cells cause a decrease in SOM activity [25].  This process does not seem to require active whisking by the animal as passive whisking will also instigate the
same mechanism via thalamic relays [26]. 
Similar to that observed with KOR modulation, studies have
strongly suggested a role for SOM cells in learning.  Silencing SOM cells
in the hippocampus impairs acquisition of contextual-based fear
learning [27].  SOM cells are also disinhibited by VIP-containing inhibitory neurons during auditory discrimination [28]. 