
The visual system has limited processing capacity, so simultaneous
stimuli present in the visual ﬁeld mutually suppress their evoked activity in the visual cortex.  Competition between stimuli can be resolved
by top-down mechanisms, such as selective attention, or by bottom-up
stimulus-driven mechanisms, such as saliency.  Selective attention to the
behavioral relevant stimuli is considered a top-down process, in which
high-level processing areas in the prefrontal and posterior parietal
cortices, exert a biasing signal towards the visual regions processing the
relevant items (Miller & D’Esposito, 2005).  As a consequence, sensory
regions show increased activity for the relevant vs the irrelevant items
(Armstrong, Fitzgerald, & Moore, 2006; Buﬀalo, Fries, Landman,
Liang, & Desimone, 2010), making stimulus processing more accurate
(Richter, Thompson, Bosman, & Fries, 2017).  Neural synchrony seems
to be a key mechanism to enhance neural representation of the attended
sensory input.  Several models postulate that gamma and alpha band
oscillations play a pivotal role in top-down processes such as selective
attention, with antagonist roles (Fries, Reynolds, Rorie, & Desimone,2008;
Oostenveld, & Desimone,Womelsdorf,
inhibition of
Jensen & Mazaheri, 2010; Klimesch Name, 2007; Womelsdorf, Fries,
Mitra, & Desimone, 2006).  Whereas gamma synchronization represents
a high excitability state of the underlying neural population (Fries Name,
2001), and is thus associated with processing of information; alpha
synchronization represents a state of low excitability and has been associated with the functional
task-irrelevant regions
(Jensen & Mazaheri, 2010).  In this line, alpha modulation in visual
areas represents an anticipatory visuospatial attention correlate.  Some
experiments have found an alpha power increase (or alpha synchronization) ipsilateral to the attended hemiﬁeld related to the suppression
of unattended neural representations (Kelly, Lalor, Reilly, & Foxe, 2006;
Rihs, Michel, & Thut, 2007;Worden, Foxe, Wang, & Simpson, 2000),
whereas others have found an alpha power decrease (or desynchronization) contralateral
to the attended hemiﬁeld (Kelly, GomezRamirez, & Foxe, 2009; Sauseng Name, 2005; Yamagishi, Goda, Callan,
Anderson, & Kawato, 2005) linked to enhancement of neural excitability in cortical areas processing the attended stimulus. 
Like visuospatial attention, working memory (WM) has capacity
⁎ Corresponding author. 