
In humans exposure to stressful conditions can result in debilitating
mental disorders with altered memory performances [1–3].  Response to
stress is complex and includes avoidance of contexts and cues associated with the stressor.  This avoidance behavior is mainly due to development of fear memory.  In addition to the development of fear
memory, which is often strong and persistent, there could be impairment of other forms of memories, along with the development of anxiety and depression as well as physiological changes.  While acute
stress and its neurological eﬀects were the focus of several studies,
chronic stress can also disrupt memory performance and change hippocampal cell structure and function [4,5].  Interestingly chronic stress
results in remarkable variability in memory performances [6–8] indicating multiple factors may be involved in modulation of memory
with chronic stress.  However, little is known about these factors and
especially their relationship with molecular and physiological processes
that modulate memory. 
Strength of the stress is a major factor that is positively correlated toin strong adverse psychobiological
the stress responses.  Traumatic stress such as exposure to predators canin rodents. 
Furthermore, exposure to predators [9] better mimic the life threatening stress that is often associated with human stress related psychiatric conditions such as PTSD.  Especially ethological relevance and
potency of predator exposure is believed to be a highly relevant approach for developing an intense, psychological response in rodents [9]. 
Chronic traumatic stress also has high human health relevance as many
stressors like childhood abuse, sexual abuse or domestic violence can
often be continual in nature.  Despite this relevance preclinical research
on chronic traumatic stress is scant and the propensity of chronic predator stress to develop defective memory performance is not well studied. 
The hippocampus located in the medial temporal lobe of the brain is
crucial for formation of memories [10,11].  Patients with stress disorders tend to have lower hippocampal volume and impaired hippocampus dependent memories [12–15].  In addition to neurotransmitter
receptors, such as cholinergic receptors, that are involved in the molecular mechanisms of memory encoding,the neurons
⁎ Corresponding author.  Department of Biological and Environmental Science, Texas A & M University−Commerce, Commerce, TX, Tel. :+ 903 468 8648,
E-mail address: kparameshwaran@tamuc. edu (K.  Parameshwaran). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 013
Received 8 June 2017; Received in revised form 24 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 08 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
A.  Bhakta Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 32–40
hippocampus also express receptors for stress hormones and inﬂammatory mediators [16–19].  The inﬂammatory and stress responses
mediated by these receptors are often disruptive to memory.  Elevated
inﬂammatory and immunological responses in the hippocampus are
also associated with certain stress disorders [20–24].  Furthermore, increased levels of stress hormones and inﬂammatory mediators are also
known to cause cell death in the hippocampus and other brain regions
[25–30].  These ﬁndings
stress hormones and inﬂammatory mediators in the hippocampus may play a crucial role in
stress induced memory deﬁcits.  In addition to increased inﬂammatory
responses, alterations of neurotrophins are also strongly correlated with
the pathophysiology of stress [31–33].  The stress related and inﬂammation associated cellular processes associated with decreased
memory are not fully understood.  Therefore, in this present study we
utilized the rat-mouse predator-prey relationship [34] in order to
analyze the chronic traumatic stress exposure induced behavioral and
molecular changes in mice. 
indicate that
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Animals and stress procedure
Male C57BL/B6 mice (1 month old) and old (> 1 year) male Long
Evans rats were housed in standard housing conditions (12 h dark; 12 h
light) with free access to food and water.  Rats and mice were housed in
separate rooms.  Mice were randomly divided into control and predator
stress groups.  All procedures involving live animals were in accordance
with National Institutes of Health Guidelines for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals and with the animal use protocol approved by
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. 
Chronic traumatic stress in mice was induced by exposure to the
Long Evan rats [34].  Brieﬂy, a mouse was placed inside a clear plastic
hamster ball (Super Pet, Elk Grove Village, IL; material # 100079348)
and then the hamster ball was placed inside the home cage of an aggressive rat for 30 min for 28 consecutive days (Fig.  1).  This type of
stress allows visual and olfactory exposure to the predator without direct physical contacts that might lead to injury or death to the mice.  An
individual mouse was not exposed to the same rat for two consecutive2. 2.  Behavioral procedures
Open ﬁeld activity was studied by placing each mouse at the center
of a rectangular open ﬁeld area (34 cm X 34 cm) and allowing them to
explore for 10 min.  Elevated plus maze test was performed as previously described [35] and the time spent in open and closed arms were
measured.  Sucrose preference test was performed by providing mice
with a choice between two identical bottles, one ﬁlled with tap water
and the other with 2% sucrose solution, in their home cages for 48 h. 
Fig 1.  Design and time line for chronic predator stress exposure in mice.  Each stress
episode consisted of placing a mouse in a transparent plastic ball and placing the ball
inside the home cage of a rat.  Control and stressed mice underwent a battery of behavioral evaluations that contained open ﬁeld test (OFT), elevated plus maze (EPM), radial
arm maze test (RAM), and sucrose preference test (SPT). The bottles were switched after 24 h to avoid any side preference
[34,36].  Amount of sucrose solution consumed was measured. 
Radial arm maze (RAM) experiments were performed as previously
described [37] with some minor modiﬁcations.  Prior to radial arm maze
experiments mice were diet-restricted to reduce and maintain a body
weight of ∼85. 0% of their ad libitum food body weight.  During this
period mice were introduced to a food reward (Reese’s peanut butter
chips).  Mice were pre-trained for 3 days to associate the maze with the
experience of obtaining the food reward by allowing each animal free
access to all eight arms until food reward from each arm is consumed. 
Radial arm maze tests consisted of two phases, each lasting for 5 consecutive days and there was one trial per day.  Prior to each trial each
mouse was placed in the central chamber of the maze for a two minute
acclimation period.  During the ﬁrst test phase (one test/day for 5 days)
mice freely explored all eight arms with each arm baited with the food
reward.  For each mouse the trial ended after either collecting the last
food reward or 15 min of elapsed time.  In the second phase (one pair of
test/day for 5 days) each mouse was tested twice with 3 min interval
between tests.  In the ﬁrst test 4 arms were closed and the remaining 4
arms were baited with the food reward.  Mice were individually allowed
to explore the open arms and consume the food reward.  This ﬁrst test
ended after the last food reward was consumed or 15 min of elapsed
time and the mouse was taken out and placed in its home cage for the
inter-test interval.  In the second test all 8 arms were open but only four
arms that were previously closed were baited with the food reward.  The
test ended after either the last food reward was consumed or after
15 min of elapsed time.  In between trials the behavioral apparatus were
wiped with 70% ethanol to eliminate odor cues. 
2. 3.  Western blot
Western blot experiments were performed by following standard
protocols that included separation of equal quantities of total proteins
in separate wells of a SDS-PAGE gel and subsequent transfer of proteins
to PVDF membranes.  Membranes were probed overnight at 4 °C with
the following primary antibodies: anti-interleukin-1β (IL-β; Cell
Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA), anti-nerve growth factor (NGF;
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX), anti-brain derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF; Santa Cruz) and β-actin (Cell Signaling).  Membranes
were then probed with an appropriate horseradish peroxidase conjugated secondary antibody, incubated with SuperSignal® West Pico
Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Rockford, IL, USA) and
the bands were developed in a ChemiDoc MP system (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, California, USA).  Band intensities of each membrane were
normalized with corresponding β-actin band intensities using ImageJ
(National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) program. 
2. 4.  Quantitative RT-PCR
Relative gene expression in the hippocampus was determined by
using a two-step quantitative reverse transcription PCR process combined with Livak’s (2−ΔΔCt) method.  Total RNA was extracted and
puriﬁed using the Trizol® Plus PureLink™ RNA Mini Kit (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA).  RNA concentration and purity was determined by
using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc,
Wilmington, DE, USA).  An equal amount of starting RNA was used for
subsequent cDNA synthesis by using the qScript™ cDNA SuperMix
(Quanta Biosciences, Gaithersburg, MD, USA).  The qPCR analysis was
performed using PerfeCTa® SYBR® Green FastMix (Quanta Biosciences,
Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and the Rotor-Gene® Q HRM System (Quiagen,
Hilden, Germany).  Validated Mus musculus primer sets (Table 1) were
obtained from a database [38–40] and 18s rRNA was used as the endogenous control for relative gene expression analysis.  The 20 μl qPCR
reaction mix contained 70 ng cDNA, 1 x PerfeCTa® SYBR® Green FastMix, and 0. 25 μM of each forward and reverse primers. 
A.  Bhakta et al. List of primers used for qRT-PCR. 
Gene PrimerBank ID
Sequence 5′-3′6680103a117384009a122947562a19055166a16681285a16753894a1
18S rRNAsense: AGCTCCCCCTGGTAGAGAC
antisense: GGTGAAGACGCAGAAACCTTG
sense: GAAAGGCGCTGGAGTCAAGT
antisense: TGTTCGGAGTAGCACCGGAA
sense: CCTCAGCCGGTTCTGATCC
antisense: GCGGAAAAAGTTAGCCGCAG
sense: AAGTGCCGAGCTGAGATGC
antisense: CGACCTGTGCAACCCTTTC
sense: TCGGCTCCTTTCCTCACTCA
antisense: CTCATAGGGTTGTTCGCTCGG
sense: CGGGTTTCAACGCCGACTA
antisense: TTGGCACTAGAGACGGACAGA
sense: GTAACCCGTTGAACCCCATT
antisense: CCATCCAATCGGTAGTAGCG
2. 5.  Acetylcholine determination
Acetylcholine levels in the hippocampus of control and stressed
mice were determined using an Amplex™ Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA; cat# A12217).  Brieﬂy, clear supernatants of
tissue samples were prepared and the experiments were performed
according to the manufacturer’s protocol.  Fluorescence was detected by
a Syngergy HTX Multi-Mode Reader (BioTek, Winooski, Vermont, USA;
excitation = 530 nm, emission = 590 nm).  Acetylcholine levels were
calculated from a standard curve and then normalized to the protein
content of the samples. 
2. 6.  Statistical analysis
A two-way analysis of variance (2-way mixed ANOVA) was used to
determine diﬀerences between groups and detect the presence of a twoway interaction between cohort and time (days) on RAM errors. 
Independent samples t-test was used to determine signiﬁcant changes
between groups in all other experimental data.  Shaprio-Wilk’s test and
Normal Q-Q plots were used to measure normality.  Homogeneity of
variance and covariance were assessed by Levene's Test of Homogeneity
of Variances and Box's M Test, respectively.  When appropriate, adjustments for multiple comparisons were made by using the Bonferroni
post-hoc test.  For all experiments, statistical signiﬁcance was met at a pvalue < 0. 05.  All data was analyzed with IBM SPSS version 24. 
3.  Results
3. 1.  Hippocampus dependent memory was impaired by chronic predatorHigh intensity stress was shown to impair memory in humans [41]. 
Patients with stress disorders like PTSD also reported to have reduced
hippocampal volume and memory [42–44].  Here we studied whether
chronic predator stress aﬀected hippocampus dependent memory using
eight arm RAM experiments [45].  In the ﬁrst test phase experiments
control mice exhibited progressively fewer errors during the 5 day
period.  Such decreasing trend was not observed in stressed mice and
these mice had more errors than the controls (Fig.  2A; F(1, 6) = 7. 324,
p = 0. 035).  In the second test phase the same set of mice were evaluated using a delayed spatial win-shift task (Fig.  2B top panel).  Results
of these experiments also shows that the stressed mice had a greater
number of errors than their age matched control mice (Fig.  2B; F(1, 6)
= 9. 870, p = 0. 020).  These results demonstrate chronic predator stress
impairs spatial working memory in mice. 
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 32–40
3. 2.  Chronic predator stress did not induce anxiety or depression
Attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorders often include stress as a
comorbid condition [46] and patients with stress disorders also show
hyperactive behavior [47].  Comorbidity of stress, anxiety and depression is also common in certain subpopulations such as veterans [48]. 
Hence here we studied whether chronic predator stress causes such
abnormal behaviors in mice.  Mouse behavior was assessed in an open
ﬁeld arena.  Stressed mice did not show any locomotor hyperactivity as
the mean speed and total distance traveled were not diﬀerent between
stressed and control mice (Fig.  3A–C; speed: t(9) = 2. 26, p = 0. 06);
total distance: t(8) = 2. 30, p = 0. 12).  Anxiety was evaluated by calculating the time a mouse spent in the center of the open ﬁeld arena and
also by EPM.  Results show the amount of time spent in the center of the
open ﬁeld (Fig.  4A; t(14) = 2. 14, p = 0. 28), time in open arms of EPM
(Fig.  4C; t(14) = 2. 14, p = 0. 44), and time in closed arms of the EPM
(Fig.  4D; t(14) = 2. 14, p = 0. 59) were not diﬀerent between control
and stressed mice.  These results indicate the chronic traumatic stress
protocol did not induce anxiety in mice. 
Sucrose preference test was performed to study depression in both
groups of mice.  Results of these experiments reveal the sucrose preference of control mice was not diﬀerent from that of stressed mice
(Fig.  4E; t(14) = 2. 14, p = 0. 13).  These results suggest that chronic
predator stress does not induce anhedonia, a hallmark symptom of
human depression [49–51]. 
3. 3.  Neurotrophins were not altered in response to chronic predator stress
Stress in humans is often associated with altered neurotrophin signaling [52,53].  Furthermore, brain neurotrophin signaling is altered in
response to stress and also in depression, one of the adverse behavioral
phenotype of stress disorders [54–56].  Therefore, using western blot
analysis we measured the levels of NGF and BDNF in the hippocampus. 
Mature/pro-BDNF ratio of stressed mice was not diﬀerent from that of
the controls (Fig.  5A; t(6) = 2. 44, p = 0. 22).  Similarly mature/precursor ratios of NGF were also not diﬀerent between the stressed and
control groups (Fig.  5B; t(6) = 2. 44, p = 0. 05).  These results suggest
BDNF and NGF signaling was not aﬀected by the chronic stress. 
3. 4.  Hippocampal CRH gene expression was modiﬁed by chronic predatorTo further investigate the impact of stress we quantiﬁed the gene
expression levels of stress associated factors in the hippocampus.  Levels
of CRH mRNA in the hippocampus of stressed mice were lower than
those of controls (Fig.  6A; t(6) = 7. 39, p = 0. 0003).  There were no
diﬀerences in glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1; Fig.  6A; t(6) = 0. 21,
p = 0. 83), mineralocorticoid receptor (NR3C2; Fig.  6A; t(6) = 0. 22,
p = 0. 82), zinc ﬁnger protein, ZIF-268 (EGR1; Fig.  6B; t(6) = −0. 96,
p = 0. 37), activity regulated cytoskeleton associated protein (Arc;
Fig.  6B; t(6) = −0. 87. 39, p = 0. 41), and Fos proto-oncogene (c-Fos;
Fig.  6B; t(6) = −1. 20, p = 0. 27) mRNA levels between stressed and
control groups.  These results illustrate that chronic stress resulted in the
downregulation of CRH gene expression but did not alter the expressions of glucocorticoid, mineralocorticoid receptors or immediate-early3. 5.  Chronic predator stress induced proinﬂammatory response and
decreased acetylcholine levels in the hippocampus
Since stress can induce inﬂammatory responses in neurons [57] we
studied the protein levels of IL-1β in the hippocampus.  Results show
that the ratio of mature/precursor IL-1β levels was increased in stressed
mice when compared to the controls (Fig.  7A; t(6) = 2. 44, p = 0. 03). 
This indicates that chronic predator stress induced inﬂammatory responses in the hippocampus and such responses might persist even inA.  Bhakta Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 32–40
Fig.  2.  Working memory performance of
control (shaded circles) and stressed (open
circles) mice.  (A) Schematic diagram for
training phase (8 arm open, eight arm
baited); control mice showed fewer errors
(n = 8, *p = 0. 035) than the stressed mice. 
(B) Schematic diagram for the delayed winshift testing; control mice exhibited fewerthan the stressed mice (n = 8,
*p = 0. 020). 
Fig.  3.  Open ﬁeld activity of control and
stressed mice.  (A) Representative traces illustrating the locomotor activity of a control
and a stressed mouse.  (B) Mean speed of
animals in the arena were not diﬀerent between groups (n = 8, p = 0. 06).  (C) Total
distances
traversed during the 10 min
period were not diﬀerent between groups
(n = 8, p = 0. 12). 
Fig.  4.  Lack of anxiety or anhedonia in stressed mice. 
(A) Time spent in the center of the open ﬁeld arena
was not diﬀerent between control and stressed mice
(n = 8, p = 0. 28).  (B) Activity traces of a control
and a stressed mice illustrating similar open arm
activities.  (C) Time spent in the open arm by stressed
mice was not diﬀerent from control mice (n = 8,
0. 44).  (D) Control and stressed mice spent similar
durations ofp = 0. 59).  (E) Control and stressed mice consumedsolution (n = 8,
p = 0. 13). 
time in the closed armsof35
A.  Bhakta Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 32–40
Fig.  5.  BDNF and NGF signaling was unchanged in mice exposed to chronic predator exposure.  (A) Representative blots for mature and pro BDNF, and the loading control β-actin; ratios
between mature and pro BDNF in control and stressed mice hippocampi were not diﬀerent (n = 4, p = 0. 22).  (B) Representative blots for precursor and mature NGF, and β-actin; group
data illustrating no diﬀerence between the groups (n = 4, p = 0. 05). 
<Conclusion> Discussion. 
Here we show that chronic predator stress for 28 days caused deﬁcits in working memory, decreased CRH gene expression, reduced
acetylcholine levels and increased the proinﬂammatory cytokine IL-1β
in the hippocampus of adolescent mice.  Interestingly these changes
were not accompanied by anxiety, anhedonia or changes in locomotor
activity.  Furthermore, levels of neurotrophins such as BDNF and NGF
were not altered.  Memory deﬁcits observed in our study are consistent
with some previous reports [62–64] and could be due to decreased CRH
expression in the hippocampus as CRH signaling is implicated in
memory processing in rodents.  Low levels of CRH were reported in
patients with Alzheimer’s disease [65,66] and increasing free CRH levels enhanced cognition [67,68].  Direct injection of CRH into the hippocampus also increased memory retention in rats [69].  These ﬁndings
support our results suggesting that reduced expression of CRH in the
hippocampus of stressed mice could be a factor underlying memory
deﬁcits. 
Predatory exposure is a strong psychological stress and therefore
initial exposures to the predator may have caused strong elevations in
adrenocorticotropic hormone leading to reduced CRH expression [70]. 
Since the predator exposures did not accompany any other noxious
stimuli or physical harm, subsequent chronic exposures might have led
to stress desensitization and to a stress non-responsive period [71,72]. 
Reduction in CRH expression is likely sustained during this potential
non-responsive period because CRH mRNA levels were shown to be
unchanged in types of stress (chronic immobilization or cold exposure)
associated with desensitization of the ACTH responses [73].  CRH could
be a key molecule regulating memory as a previous studies showed a
positive correlation between central CRH levels and acetylcholine release [74]. 