
Despite on-going research, the progress in knowledge of pathogenesis and pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders, particularly depression, remains unsatisfactory.  This emphasizes the need for animal
models to study the pathophysiology and treatment targets to overcome
the great heterogeneity of this disease due to its multifactorial background [1].  While there are a number of animal models, from rodents
[2–5] to ﬁsh [6], mimicking characteristic features of the pathology,
the validity of such models − particularly in light of the negative effects on the animals − is under controversial debate [7,8]. 
Since both perspectives need to be considered, the scientiﬁc and the
ethical, one needs to ﬁnd a good compromise to fulﬁll both criteria. 
Of course it is not possible to develop animal models mimicking the
human situation 1:1, but there are emotional, homeostatic and psychomotoric core symptoms of human depression that may be assessed
objectively in rodent models [9].  One approach could be an increased
awareness with regard to the optimal constellation of paradigms and
model organisms [10].  As a prerequisite, in mice this requires an adequate consideration of background strains, which may fundamentally
diﬀer with regard to a solid basis for the respective mutation [11–17]. 
Many in vivo studies involving genetic manipulations in mice are
conducted on a C57BL/6 background, which was recently described as
“gold standard” [18,19].  On the other hand, to model the human
condition in a more translational way it would be advisable not to use
inbred animals, but to work with mixed genetic backgrounds [20],
which resemble the heterogeneity of patients more closely.  This is
supported by a study by Ridder Name who was able to demonstrate a
helpless behavioral phenotype in GR+/− mice on a mixed C57BL/6N x
FVB/N background, not under basal, but stressed conditions [20]. 
Contrary, mice overexpressing the GR (on the mixed background as
well) showed the opposite phenotype when analyzed for respective
⁎ Corresponding author at: Interfaculty Biomedical Research Facility, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 347, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. 
E-mail address: miriam. vogt@ibf. uni-heidelberg. de (M. A.  Vogt). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 07. 037
Received 23 June 2017; Received in revised form 21 July 2017; Accepted 25 July 2017
Available online 03 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
M. A.  Vogt Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 71–79
parameters [20,21], which emphasizes the impact of an appropriate
selection of background strains to increase the validity of in vivo studies. 
GR represents a target gene for depression and several publications
indicate its signiﬁcance in regulating the negative feedback in the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) system after stress-induced increase of corticosterone [22]. 
Since depression in humans and animals represents a multi-factorial
disease, that implies the interaction between a distinct genetic predisposition in the presence of a challenging environment [23,24], the
approach by Ridder Name was considered a suitable model with good
face- and construct validity.  In addition, stress physiological data and
the responsiveness of the model to DEX/CRH challenge underlined its
impact with regard to predictive validity [20,25]. 
What remains, however, a challenging aspect is the general validity
of diﬀerent animal models for depression and anxiety [26].  Considering
construct validity, i. e.  etiology of a disease, the learned helplessness
(LH) paradigm may be a workable compromise due to a rather artiﬁcial
− instead of straight translational − way to induce the depressive-like
state by uncontrollable and unpredictable foot shocks [27].  From this
point of view, the model of unpredictable chronic mild stress (UCMS)
may be better suited, but also bears some challenges [28,29]. 
The aim of our study here was to examine the transferability of a
heterozygous mutation of the GR to two commonly used background
strains, which naturally diﬀer in their basal characteristics [11].  Furthermore, it was our intention to compare two diﬀerent stress models to
be able to make a more valid, generalized statement about the role of
GR in depression. 
To follow up our hypothesis that, with our models, genetic traits can
evoke a stable depressive-like phenotype − reliable even on multiple
background strains, we investigated GR+/− animals on a C57BL/6N
and BALB/c background.  Assuming that a well-described stressor is a
decisive factor, the mice were divided in two cohorts, exposed to either
four weeks of UCMS or LH respectively, and were then analyzed in
standardized behavioral tests for emotional and depressive-like behaviors. 
<Middle> Material & methods. 
2. 1.  Animals and housing conditions
All experiments were conducted with male mice (12–15 weeks old
at the onset of the experiments) being either heterozygous for the expression of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR+/−) or littermate controls
[30].  The founders of GR-heterozygous mice (GR+/−) were developed
by using homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells as described earlier [30].  All mice were genotyped after weaning to check for
heterozygosity of the GR alleles (Primer sequences from 5′ to 3′: GR1:
GGC ATG CAC ATT ACG GCC TTC T; GR4: GTG TAG CAG CCA GCT
TAC AGG A GR8: CCT TCT CAT TCC ATG TCA GCA TGT).  Real-time
RT-PCR and Western Blot analyses by Ridder Name [20] revealed a
signiﬁcant down regulation of GR protein as well as mRNA level in GR
heterozygous mice.  Mice were bred either for a minimum of 10 generations on a C57BL/6N (N = 95) or on a BALB/c (N = 75) background strain in the animal facility of the Central Institute of Mental
Health (CIMH, Mannheim, Germany).  Mice were weaned at the age of 4
weeks, and were then housed in type III Macrolon® cages equipped with
nesting material, food and water ad libitum in littermate groups. 
At an age of 8 weeks, the litter groups were divided in two independent cohorts being either transported to the University François
Rabelais (Tours, France) for the unpredictable chronic mild stress
(UCMS) paradigm and the following behavioral experiments (see
Fig.  1A for details) or transferred from the CIMH breeding to housing
facility for the basic behavioral experiments and the subsequent learned
helplessness (LH) paradigm (see Fig.  1B for details). 
For the UCMS, the animals were randomly separated into speciﬁc
housing conditions as follows: unstressed control mice (C57BL/6N
GR+/+ N = 15, GR+/− N = 14, BALB/c GR+/+ N = 9, GR+/−
N = 10) were group housed up to a maximum of four littermates per
cage in type III Macrolon® cages equipped with red transparent igloos
and PVC plastic tunnels.  Mice exposed to the UCMS paradigm (C57BL/
6N GR+/+ N = 15, GR+/− N = 15, BALB/c GR+/+ N = 10, GR+/−
N = 10) were maintained single housed in disposable cages with a ﬂoor
area of 187 cm2 (Charles River) with standard bedding only (isolation
stress).  Stress group and control group were maintained in separated
rooms to avoid confounding eﬀects of the stress procedures in the
control group. 
In the LH paradigm group, mice were single housed with standard
bedding and nesting material (paper tissue) in type II Macrolon® cages,
arriving in the experimental unit 2 weeks prior to the onset of the behavioral experiments (C57BL/6N GR+/+ N = 15, GR+/− N = 14,
BALB/c GR+/+ N = 9, GR+/− N = 10). 
All behavioral procedures were conducted during the dark, e. g.  the
animals’ active phase with lights oﬀ at 9 am to 9 pm (UCMS paradigm)
or 7 am to 7 pm (LH paradigm).  Water and food pellets were available
ad libitum.  Bodyweight was assessed weekly when the cages were
changed.  All experiments were conducted blind to the genotype, which
was analyzed after the animals had undergone all behavioral tests.  All
animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the guidelines
of the European Commission (EC) Council Directive (2010/63/EU)
(Germany: Regierungspräsidium Karlsruhe, France: Comité Régional
d’Ethique en Expérimentation Animale (CREEA Centre Limousin)).  All
eﬀorts were made to minimize animal suﬀering and to reduce the
number of animals used. 
2. 2.  Unpredictable chronic mild stress procedure (UCMS) and behavioral
consequences
2. 2. 1.  UCMS
Mice were repeatedly subjected to various socio-environmental
stressors according to a balanced schedule for a total period of 4 weeks
as described previously (Fig 1A) [28].  The protocol applied involved
randomized, daily exposures to distinct stressors including: damp
bedding, removal of bedding, substitution of sawdust with 21 °C water
(shallow water bath), cage exchange (mice were placed in the empty
cage of another male); sawdust change, cage tilting (45°), predator
smell (rat feces) and predator bird sounds as well as an altered length
and time of the light/dark cycles, and restraint stress (1 h).  Mice were
subjected 3–4 h per day to these mild stressors.  None of the stressors
involved water or food deprivation.  In order to prevent habituation and
maintaining the aspect of unpredictability, the number of stressors and
their duration changed every day.  During the behavioral test procedure
the UCMS was stopped to avoid acute stress eﬀects.  Moreover, we
consider that the tests per se constitute another kind of stressful situation.  To manifest the function of the stressors in the UCMS paradigm we
measured bodyweight and coat state weekly. 
2. 2. 2.  Coat state
Weekly, the coat state was assessed as an index of depressive-like
state.  The total score of the coat state resulted from the sum of scores
obtained from 8 diﬀerent body parts: head, neck, dorsal coat, ventral
coat, front and hind paws, genital region and tail.  For each body area, a
score of 0 was given for a well-groomed coat and 1 for an unkempt coat. 
Thus the more elevated the total score the worse the fur [17,31].  Dirty
state is characterized by a ﬂuﬀy, greasy, less dense coat or piloerection. 
2. 2. 3.  Nest test
For the nest test all mice, including the controls, were single housed
in type II Macrolon® cages with only standard bedding, for at least 15 h
before the test started.  A square of pressed cotton (Nestlet®, 5 × 5 cm2)
was introduced into each cage 1 h before the end of the light phase. 
After 5 h and 24 h, the quality of the nest was rated by using the scale ofM. A.  Vogt Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 71–79Fig.  1.  Time lines of the two independent paradigms. 
A Unpredictable chronic mild stress (UCMS) with
behavioral testing.  UCMS consisted of several stressors applied: damp bedding, removal of bedding,
shallow water bath instead of bedding, cage exchange to foreign cage, sawdust change, cage tilting
(45°), predator smell
feces), predator bird
sounds, altered light/dark cycle, 1 h restraint stress,
in a randomized order with 3–4 h stressor exposition
per day.  During UCMS, bodyweight and coat state
was assessed weekly; nest test (NT), was performed
in the 3rd week of UCMS.  After 4 weeks of UCMS,
behavioral tests were performed: novelty suppressed
feeding (NSF), splash test (ST), home cage activity
(Act), tail suspension test (TST), all conducted withinB Basal behavioral testing prior to learned helplessness (LH) paradigm.  Locomotion in an unknown
open ﬁeld (OF) and pain sensitivity on the hotplate
(HP) was assessed under basal conditions prior to the
learned helplessness paradigm (LH, 3 days). 
Deacon [32] with 1 as no visible interaction with the nestlet up to a
score of 5 (globular nest). 
housed control animals were kept single housed for 24 h prior to testing
in a disposable cage to allow individual measurements. 
2. 2. 4.  Novelty suppressed feeding
This test induced a conﬂicting motivation between the drive to eat
and the fear of venturing the center of an unknown arena [33,34]. 
The wooden experimental box (30 × 30 × 20 cm3) was illuminated
indirectly by red light and the ﬂoor was covered with 2 cm of standard
sawdust.  12 h before the test, the food was removed from the home
cages.  One pre-weighed standard food pellet was placed on a white
paper-platform (1. 5 × 1. 5 cm2) in the center of the box.  The mouse was
placed into a corner of the test box.  Within a 3 min period, the latency
to the ﬁrst sniﬀ, number of approaches to the food as well as the latency
to start consuming the pellet was recorded.  To control for potentially
reduced appetite induced by the UCMS paradigm, the feeding drive of
each animal was assessed by returning it to the familiar environment of
the home cage immediately after the 3 min test phase, and measuring
the amount of food consumed over a further period of 5 min (home food
consumption). 
2. 2. 5.  Splash test
The splash test was used to evaluate the motivation of the mice to
initiate self-care grooming as hedonic behavior [35].  The splash test
consisted of splashing a 10% sucrose solution on the mouse’s dorsal
coat in its home cage.  Because of its viscosity, the sucrose solution
dirties the mouse fur and the animals initiate self-care grooming behaviors.  Immediately after having been splashed, the behavior of the
mice was assessed over 5 min.  Three parameters were measured: latency and frequency to groom as well as time spent grooming. 
Grooming bouts included nose/face grooming (strokes along the snout),
head washing (semicircular movements over the top of the head and
behind the ears) and body grooming (body fur licking). 
2. 2. 6.  Homecage locomotor activity (Actimeter)
The actograph device (Actimeter OSYS, Orga System, France) allowed the assessment of the activity of mice in their home cage, thus
excluding the possibility of confounding the results due to novelty-induced alterations.  The home cage was placed in the center of the device, which consisted of a 20 × 20 cm2 square plane with two light
beams, crossing the arena from midpoint to midpoint of opposite sides,
thus dividing the plane into four quadrants and automatically detecting
the movement of the animal when it crossed through, allowing to establish a score.  The higher the score, the more the mouse moved [36]. 
Testing was carried out in the dark phase for 2 h allowing a better
evaluation of the basal
locomotor activity.  Disposable cages were
placed in the device 15 min before the beginning of testing, group2. 2. 7.  Tail suspension test
Mice were suspended by their tails with adhesive tape (approx.  1 cm
from the tip of the tail) and attached to a horizontal pole 60 cm above
to the ﬂoor [37].  4 mice were tested simultaneously for a period of
6 min and activity was assessed by a video tracking software (Ethovision XT, Noldus, The Netherlands).  The time spent immobile, deﬁned as
motionless hanging without additional moving, was measured. 
2. 3.  Learned helplessness paradigm and preceding basal behavior
2. 3. 1.  Open ﬁeld test
The open ﬁeld test evaluates the general locomotor and exploratory
behavior of mice exposed to a large open arena under dimmed light
conditions [38,39].  It was applied to exclude potential artifacts in the
LH paradigm due to genotype-related changes in locomotion.  Activity
monitoring was conducted in a square-shaped, white open ﬁeld, measuring 50 × 50 cm2 and illuminated from above by 25 lx.  Mice were
placed into the arena individually and monitored for 10 min by a video
camera (Sony CCD IRIS).  The resulting data were analyzed using the
image processing system EthoVison 3. 0 (Noldus Information Technology, Wageningen, The Netherlands).  For each sample, the system
recorded position, object area, and the status of deﬁned events.  Parameters assessed were total distance moved, velocity, distance to walls
and time in center, which was deﬁned as the area 10 cm distant from
the walls. 
2. 3. 2.  Hotplate test
The hotplate test assesses pain sensitivity (ATLab, Vendargues,
France) and serves as a pre-test for the LH procedure to avoid false
positives due to basally altered pain sensitivity.  Temperature was set at
53 °C ( ± 0. 3 °C) and a 45 s cut-oﬀ was introduced to prevent injury of
mice.  Latency to ﬁrst reaction, i. e.  licking hind paws or jumping, was
assessed [24]. 
2. 3. 3.  Learned helplessness (LH)
The learned helplessness paradigm, a test procedure in which stress
sensitivity and depressive-like features can be measured, was conducted
as described [27].  Mice received 360 foot shocks (0. 150 mA) on 2
consecutive days
shock chamber
(18 × 18 × 30 cm3), equipped with a stainless steel grid ﬂoor (Coulborn precision regulated animal shocker, Coulborn Instruments, Düsseldorf, Germany).  Non-shocked control animals remained in the same
chambers without receiving any aversive stimulation.  The foot shocks
transparent Plexiglas®M. A.  Vogt Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 71–79
applied were unpredictable with varying shock-durations (1–3 s) and
interval episodes (1–15 s).  24 h after the second foot shock exposure;
learned helplessness was evaluated by testing two-way avoidance in a
shuttle box (Coulborn Instruments, Düsseldorf, Germany).  Spontaneous
initial shuttle activity from one compartment to the other was monitored during the ﬁrst 2 min by red-light beams at the bottom of each of
the two compartments.  Thereafter, speciﬁc avoidance learning was
tested over 30 trials.  Each trial started with a light stimulus of 5 s,
announcing a subsequent foot shock (0. 150 mA; maximal duration
10 s).  The total duration of this procedure varied (total testing time
averaged 20 min) according to each animal’s individual performance in
terms of failures (i. e.  not attempting to escape from the shock) and
escape latencies (i. e.  latency to escape after onset of the shock).  Mice
were divided in two groups, receiving either the foot shocks on the ﬁrst
two days (foot shock group, C57BL/6N GR+/+ N = 10, GR+/−
N = 10, BALB/c GR+/+ N = 10, GR+/− N = 10) or sitting in the
shock boxes without receiving any foot shocks (un-shocked control
group C57BL/6N GR+/+ N = 8, GR+/− N = 8, BALB/c GR+/+ N = 8,
GR+/− N = 8), at the 3rd day, all mice (foot shock and un-shocked
control group) were treated similarly in the shuttle boxes. 
2. 4.  Statistical analysis
Analyses were conducted using the SPSS for Windows 21.  Our focus
was on the factors ‘stress’ and ‘genotype’ within the strains of BALB/c
and C57BL/6N.  Strain comparisons were therefore not included. 
To examine the eﬀects of the UCMS over time, repeated measurement ANOVAs were applied with the factors ‘time’ as within subject
factor and both ‘stress’ plus ‘genotype’ as between subjects for intergroup comparisons.  With regard to the behavioral data, we did not
perform bi-factorial ANOVAs but rather followed an attempt of explorative statistics to ﬁnd a speciﬁc pattern of genotype or stress eﬀects. 
This was achieved by comparing the speciﬁc sub-groups directly by
Student's T-Tests.  We took into consideration that this approach requires statistical corrections if we make an overall comparison.  To be
able to see the single and speciﬁc eﬀects, though, we chose the route of
analyzing and focusing on the presence of deﬁnite signiﬁcances per se,
the parameter and the change of direction instead (Table 1).  Signiﬁcance levels were therefore uncorrected and set to p < 0. 05. 
3.  Results
3. 1.  Basal eﬀects of GR+/− genotype
We evaluated basal eﬀects of the GR+/− genotype in both control
groups of the BALB/c and the C57BL/6N background strains. 
3. 1. 1.  BALB/c
GR+/− mice, when compared totheir respective littermate controls
on a BALB/c background, did not develop any alterations in neither
absolute bodyweight, relative bodyweight change (Fig.  2A) nor coat
state over time (Fig.  2C), dependent on the genotype of the mice (repeated measurement ANOVA factor genotype: absolute bodyweight: F
(1,35) = 0. 