Article
Neuropeptide Y Regulates Sleep by Modulating
Noradrenergic Signaling
Highlights
d A genetic screen in zebraﬁsh shows that overexpression of
NPY promotes sleepChanpreet Singh, Jason Rihel,
David A.  Prober
d Mutation of npy or ablation of npy-expressing neurons results
in decreased sleep
Correspondence
dprober@caltech. edu
d NPY regulates sleep primarily by modulating the length of
wake bouts
d NPY promotes sleep by inhibiting noradrenergic signaling
In Brief
Based on a genetic screen, Singh Name
identify NPY signaling and npyexpressing neurons as regulators of
zebraﬁsh sleep.  They show that NPY
promotes sleep by inhibiting
noradrenergic signaling, thus linking NPY
signaling to an established arousalpromoting system. 
Singh Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3796–3811
December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 018
Current BiologyNeuropeptide Y Regulates Sleep
by Modulating Noradrenergic Signaling
Chanpreet Singh,1 Jason Rihel,2 and David A.  Prober1,3,*
1Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
2Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK
3Lead Contact
*Correspondence: dprober@caltech. edu
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 018Sleep is an essential and evolutionarily conserved
behavioral state whose regulation remains poorly understood.  To identify genes that regulate vertebrate
sleep, we recently performed a genetic screen in
zebraﬁsh, and here we report the identiﬁcation of
neuropeptide Y (NPY) as both necessary for normal
daytime sleep duration and sufﬁcient to promote
sleep.  We show that overexpression of NPY increases sleep, whereas mutation of npy or ablation
of npy-expressing neurons decreases sleep.  By
analyzing sleep architecture, we show that NPY
regulates sleep primarily by modulating the length
of wake bouts.  To determine how NPY regulates
sleep, we tested for
interactions with several
systems known to regulate sleep, and provide
anatomical, molecular, genetic, and pharmacological evidence that NPY promotes sleep by inhibiting
noradrenergic signaling.  These data establish NPY
as an important vertebrate sleep/wake regulator
and link NPY signaling to an established arousal-promoting system. 
INTRODUCTION
Sleep is among the most basic needs of living organisms, yet
mechanisms that regulate sleep remain poorly understood. 
Several neuropeptides have been implicated in regulating
mammalian sleep [1], including hypocretin [2–4], which promotes wakefulness, and galanin [5–8] and melanin-concentrating hormone [9–12], which promote sleep, suggesting that
examining additional neuropeptides may identify novel mechanisms that regulate sleep.  Identifying these mechanisms using
mammalian models has been challenging due to their poor
amenability for large-scale screens, although such screens are
possible [13].  As an alternative approach, several groups have
used behavioral criteria to study sleep-like states in simpler
model organisms that are amenable to screens,
including
Drosophila [14–22], C.  elegans [23–25], and zebraﬁsh [26–30]. 
In particular, several groups have demonstrated behavioral,
anatomical, genetic, and pharmacological conservation of sleep
between zebraﬁsh and mammals, establishing zebraﬁsh as a
vertebrate sleep model [26–28, 30–33].  We previously described
a screen for genes whose overexpression affects zebraﬁsh
sleep, and reported that the neuropeptide neuromedin U is
necessary and sufﬁcient for normal levels of arousal [29].  Here
we demonstrate that another neuropeptide identiﬁed in the
screen, neuropeptide Y (NPY), is necessary for daytime sleep
and sufﬁcient to promote sleep. 
injection of
NPY is widely expressed in the brain and has been implicated
in regulating endocrine, behavioral, and circadian processes
[34], and is perhaps best known for its role in promoting feeding
[35–38].  NPY has also been shown to affect sleep, but its role in
this behavioral state remains unclear.  Several studies have
shown that
in vitro-synthesized NPY into the
rodent brain [39–45] or intravenously into young healthy [46] or
depressed [47] humans can induce sleep or reduce locomotor
activity.  However, other rodent studies reported the opposite effect [48–50].  The basis for these disparate reports is unclear, but
may be due to different sites and doses of NPY injection, or the
use of in vitro-synthesized peptide that may vary in different
preparations and from endogenous NPY.  Understanding the
role of NPY in mammalian sleep is also confounded by links
between mechanisms that regulate feeding and sleep [48–51]. reports of wake promotion by injected NPY also
observed increased feeding [48–50], suggesting thatincreased wakefulness may result
from increased feeding. 
npy mutant mice exhibit several phenotypes, including increased
anxiety, depression-like behavior, and cognitive deﬁcits [52, 53],
and are less susceptible to diet-induced obesity [54].  However,
an analysis of sleep in these animals and a role for npy-expressing neurons in sleep have not been described.  As a result, the
role of NPY in vertebrate sleep remains unclear. 
Here we show that NPY is sufﬁcient to promote sleep in zebraﬁsh, whereas loss of npy or npy-expressing neurons results in
less daytime sleep.  We also show that NPY promotes sleep by
inhibiting the wake-promoting noradrenergic system, providing
a mechanistic basis for sleep regulation by NPY.  Together with
the requirement of noradrenergic signaling for the wake-promoting function of hypocretin [55, 56], these results suggest that the
noradrenergic system integrates neuropeptidergic signals that
regulate sleep/wake states. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Overexpression of Human NPY Reduces Locomotor
Activity and Increases Sleep in Zebraﬁsh
We previously performed a screen to identify genes that affect
larval zebraﬁsh sleep [29].  We injected >1,200 unique plasmids
3796 Current Biology 27, 3796–3811, December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
WT (n=143) 
hsp:npy (n=163)Night 5****Post-HS31Fni(hnltubeSDay 5Pre-HSWT (n=41) 
hsp:npy (n=40))/(yiicDhim eSGni(hnltubkW250150502010080400Pre-HS****Post-HSPre-HSAhsyiicChimpelhsubeSHotafsosR3002001000402008400 . 40 . 20 . 0Ioicr sosRarleaaf50****0. 50. 30. 1
2. 3 3. 0 4. 0Tap power (a. u. )n tafenpeeva gpe lWT (n=48) 
hsp:npy (n=40)**0. 40. 22. 3 3. 0 4. 0Tap power (a. u. )1 0Tap power (a. u. )
Figure 1.  Overexpression of Zebraﬁsh NPY Increases Sleep and Arousal Threshold
(A–G) Overexpression of zebraﬁsh NPY following a heat shock at 3 p. m.  resulted in decreased locomotor activity (A and B) and increased sleep (C and D), due to
more sleep bouts (E) and shorter sleep (F) and wake (G) bouts.  Yellow bars indicate heat shock (HS).  Pre-HS and post-HS quantify data for day 5 before and
after HS.  Mean ± SEM from four experiments is shown. 
(H) Representative stimulus-response curve for Tg(hsp:npy) animals compared to WT siblings following HS.  Data points represent mean ± SEM.  Dashed lines
mark ETP50 value for each genotype.  Tg(hsp:npy) animals had an ETP50 value of 24. 2 versus 8. 2 for WT siblings (293% increase, p < 0. 05 by extra sum-of-squares
F test). 
(legend continued on next page)
Current Biology 27, 3796–3811, December 18, 2017 3797
in which a heat shock-inducible promoter (hsp) regulates the
expression of genes that encode for secreted proteins into
wild-type (WT) zebraﬁsh embryos at the one-cell stage.  We
used human open reading frames (ORFs) encoding secreted
proteins from the hORFeome v3. 1 library [57] because there
was no resource of zebraﬁsh ORFs.  Co-injection of each plasmid
with tol2 transposase mRNA resulted in incorporation of the hspregulated transgene into the genome in many cells of each animal and enabled heat shock-induced overexpression [29].  We
then compared sleep/wake behaviors in injected animals before
and after heat shock and to negative control animals injected
with an hsp:egfp plasmid.  One gene whose overexpression
increased sleep at night (Z score 1. 8) encoded human NPY (Figure S1A).  Even though zebraﬁsh exhibit high levels of sleep at
night, NPY-overexpressing animals were 28% less active and
slept 34% more than control animals during the night after
heat shock (p < 0. 05 and p < 0. 01, two-tailed Student’s t test)
(Figures S1B–S1G).  We observed a similar phenotype during
the day before heat shock that did not reach statistical signiﬁcance, consistent with leaky expression from hsp that often is
observed using this transient injection assay, but is not observed
using stable transgenic lines [29]. 
Overexpression of Zebraﬁsh NPY Reduces Locomotor
Activity and Increases Sleep in Zebraﬁsh
Using reciprocal BLAST searches, we identiﬁed a single zebraﬁsh
npy ortholog, which encodes for a preproprotein that generates a
predicted 36-amino acid mature peptide that is 89% identical to
the human and mouse orthologs (Figure S1H).  npy is widely expressed in the mammalian brain, particularly in the hypothalamus,
amygdala, locus coeruleus (LC), and cerebral cortex [58, 59].  Using
in situ hybridization (ISH) with an npy-speciﬁc probe, immunostaining for total extracellular signal-regulated kinase (t-ERK), and image registration to the Z-Brain atlas [60], we found that npy is similarly expressed in several discrete nuclei within the larval zebraﬁsh
brain (Figures S1I–S1N; Movie S1).  We also observed npy expression in the retina (data not shown) but not in other tissues. 
To test whether overexpression of zebraﬁsh NPY affects
sleep, we generated Tg(hsp:npy) zebraﬁsh.  Tg(hsp:npy) animals
and their WT siblings had similar amounts of locomotor activity
and sleep before heat shock (Figures 1A–1D).  However,
following a heat shock at 3 p. m. , Tg(hsp:npy) animals were
50% less active (Figures 1A and 1B) and slept 111% more (Figures 1C and 1D) than their WT siblings for the rest of the day
(p < 0. 0001, two-tailed Student’s t test).  The phenotype resulted
from a 230% increase in the number of sleep bouts (Figure 1E)
and an 85% decrease in the length of wake bouts (Figure 1G)
(p < 0. 0001, two-tailed Student’s t test), with a smaller decrease
in the length of sleep bouts (Figure 1F), and thus is primarily due
to fragmentation of the wake state. 
The increase in sleep after the heat shock-induced pulse of
NPY overexpression dampened by nighttime.  A previous study
showed that the circadian system inhibits sleep in the evening,
when homeostatic sleep drive is high [61], suggesting that the
circadian system might limit NPY overexpression-induced sleep
to the day.  To test whether NPY overexpression can also increase
sleep at night, we heat shocked animals during the last hour of the
day. 