Article
Nigrotectal Stimulation Stops Interval Timing in Mice
Highlights
d Novel head-ﬁxed timing task allows rapid acquisition of
timing behavior
d Single-trial analysis reveals stepping dynamics and strong
motivational modulation
d Nigrotectal pathway activation delays timing of future
behaviorKoji Toda, Nicholas A.  Lusk,
Glenn D. R.  Watson, . . . , Haofang E.  Li,
Warren H.  Meck, Henry H.  Yin
Correspondence
kt131@duke. edu (K. T. ),
hy43@duke. edu (H. H. Y. )
In Brief
Toda Name design a novel paradigm to
study interval timing in mice.  Using
optogenetic manipulations, the authors
show that activation of the nigrotectal
pathway not only suppresses ongoing
behavior but also delays timing of future
behavior.  These results suggest that
disrupting basal ganglia output can stop
central networks underlying timing. 
Toda Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3763–3770
December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 003
Current BiologyNigrotectal Stimulation
Stops Interval Timing in Mice
Koji Toda,1,2,3,5,* Nicholas A.  Lusk,1,5 Glenn D. R.  Watson,1 Namsoo Kim,1 Dongye Lu,4 Haofang E.  Li,1 Warren H.  Meck,1
and Henry H.  Yin1,4,6,*
1Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
2Human Informatics Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Umezono 1-1-1, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-8568, Japan
3Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Kojimachi 5-3-1, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0083, Japan
4Department of Neurobiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27708, USA
5These authors contributed equally
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: kt131@duke. edu (K. T. ), hy43@duke. edu (H. H. Y. )
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 003Considerable evidence implicates the basal ganglia
in interval timing, yet the underlying mechanisms
remain poorly understood.  Using a novel behavioral
task, we demonstrate that head-ﬁxed mice can be
trained to show the key features of timing behavior
within a few sessions.  Single-trial analysis of licking
behavior reveals stepping dynamics with variable
onset times, which is responsible for the canonical
Gaussian distribution of timing behavior.  Moreover,
the duration of licking bouts decreased as mice
became sated, showing a strong motivational
modulation of licking bout initiation and termination. 
Using optogenetics, we examined the role of the
basal ganglia output in interval timing.  We stimulated a pathway important for licking behavior, the
GABAergic output projections from the substantia
nigra pars reticulata to the deep layers of the superior
colliculus.  We found that stimulation of this pathway
not only cancelled licking but also delayed the initiation of anticipatory licking for the next interval in a
frequency-dependent manner.  By combining quantitative behavioral analysis with optogenetics in the
head-ﬁxed setup, we established a new approach
for studying the neural basis of interval timing. 
INTRODUCTION
Time perception is unique because there are no dedicated sensory organs or receptors for time.  The brain appears to create the
subjective sense of time by integrating a variety of sensory inputs
and internal states [1].  Many studies have implicated corticobasal ganglia networks in interval timing in the seconds to minutes range [2–5].  However, it remains unclear how basal ganglia
output contributes to timing behavior. 
Traditional studies examining interval timing have two major
limitations.  First, the behavioral methods are time consuming
and yield results that are difﬁcult to interpret.  For example,
operant procedures using lever pressing as the behavioral
readout are commonly used across many species [6]. 
Training typically takes months and produces complex stereotyped behaviors between lever presses.  Second, techniques
commonly used in animal timing studies, like lesion, electrical stimulation, and pharmacological manipulations, cannot
precisely manipulate speciﬁc neuronal populations and neuroimaging timing studies in humans rely on correlational
analyses of brain activity and behavioral data [4, 7].  To overcome these limitations, we designed a novel task for studying
interval timing in head-ﬁxed mice during optogenetic manipulation of deﬁned neuronal populations.  Using a ﬁxed time
schedule of reinforcement, we trained mice to exhibit accurate timing behavior within a few hours.  Mice rapidly showed
licking behavior that peaks at the expected time of reward
delivery in accordance with previous studies using lever
presses as a behavioral measure [8, 9].  Licking on this task
can be precisely quantiﬁed and shows the hallmarks of interval timing. 
Licking is also a behavioral measure with well-characterized
neural circuits [10–12].  Previous work demonstrates the importance of a cortico-basal ganglia circuit, including the ventrolateral striatum and lateral substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) in
orofacial behavior [10, 13].  In particular, a subset of GABAergic
projections from the SNr to the deep layers of the superior
colliculus (SC)
is critical for the initiation and termination of
self-paced licking behavior [10, 14].  The basal ganglia output
regulates SC neurons in regulating licking bouts.  The SC output,
in turn, regulates central pattern generators in the brainstem to
generate orofacial and other movements [15, 16]. 
Optogenetic stimulation of
the nigrotectal pathway can
directly terminate licking behavior by uniformly increasing
inhibition of tectal projection neurons, thus disrupting descending motor commands [10].  By stimulating channelrhodopsin
(ChR2)-expressing GABAergic projection neurons in the SNr,
we could uniformly increase SNr output and interfere with the
normal pattern of nigrotectal signaling, which is time locked to
the licking bout [17].  Using this procedure combined with quantitative behavioral analysis, we examined the contribution of the
basal ganglia output to interval timing behavior in mice. 
Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd.  3763
In agreement with previous work in freely moving mice [10],
voluntary licking behavior was highly stereotyped, consisting of
bouts of rhythmic protrusion and retractions of the tongue at a
relatively ﬁxed rate (6–10 Hz) for both anticipatory and consummatory licking [17].  After training, all mice showed anticipatory
licking prior to each reward delivery (Figure 1C, left), starting
4–6 s before the reward and peaking at roughly the expected
time of reward delivery.  Consummatory licking stopped 2–4 s
after the reward delivery.  As the mouse became sated during
the session, anticipatory licking gradually decreased and
consummatory licking decreased more abruptly (Figure S1).  After training, all mice showed anticipatory licking prior to each
reward delivery (Figure 1C, left), starting 4–6 s before the reward
and peaking at roughly the expected time of reward delivery. 
Peak Probe Trials
After 5–10 days of training on the ﬁxed-time task, peak probe
trials were introduced (Figure 1B, right).  During these trials,
reward delivery was omitted, followed by an extended period
of no reward delivery.  Probe trials lasted for 30–40 s and were
randomly inserted with 20% probability.  Mice readily learned
this peak procedure with maximal response rates occurring
around 10 s (i. e. , the expected reward time) within a few days
(Figure 1C, right). 
A hallmark of interval timing is the spread in timing of behavior
scales linearly with the temporal duration being timed.  This ‘‘scalar property’’ is analogous to the Weber-Fechner law in psychophysics [1].  To test whether mice also exhibit the scalar property
using our novel behavioral paradigm, three mice were trained on
the peak procedure with two additional intervals: 7. 5 and 15 s
(Figure 2A).  All mice tested were highly accurate in timing these
intervals (Figure 2B; 7. 5-s condition: 8. 09 ± 0. 10 s; 10-s condition: 10. 33 ± 0. 14 s; 15-s condition: 15. 26 ± 0. 19 s; n = 13 for
each condition; 3–5 sessions for each duration for three mice). 
Performance on these three durations was normalized by the
peak response time and maximum lick rate and then superimposed across all three intervals (Figure 2C).  The resulting data
clearly demonstrate the scalar property (Figure 2D; 7. 5-s condition: 0. 55 ± 0. 04; 10-s condition: 0. 56 ± 0. 03; 15-s condition:
0. 59 ± 0. 02; n = 13 for each condition; 3–5 sessions for each
duration for 3 subjects).  This result establishes that the headﬁxed peak procedure is a powerful method that not only expedites training but also produces results with the essential
features of interval timing behavior. 
Stepping Dynamics and Motivational Modulation of
Licking Behavior
To reveal ‘‘single-trial’’ dynamics of the licking behavior [17, 19],
we analyzed behavioral data during each interval using statistical
methods previously used for ﬁtting latent dynamical spike-train
models [19].  Our analysis revealed that behavior during the
ﬁxed-time-schedule task is well described by a ‘‘stepping’’
model for both the start and end of the licking bout (Figures 3A
and 3B).  In other words, the licking behavior displays stepping
dynamics with variable step onset and offset times.  In accordance with traditional lever-pressing data from rodents, the canonical Gaussian distribution found on peak trials, a key feature
of interval timing behavior, is a product of averaging many trials. 
This conclusion is in agreement with a recent study that found
Figure 1.  Experimental Setup and Behavioral Tasks
(A) Head-ﬁxed setup.  Mice were placed on a raised platform and secured in
place by head bars attached to chronic implants.  A blunt-tipped needle is
placed within licking distance, allowing for administration of a 10% sucrose
reward using a solenoid under the control of an Arduino and MATLAB
Psychtoolbox. 
(B) Schematic diagram of the behavioral tasks.  In the ﬁxed-time-schedule task
(left), a drop of water was delivered every 10 s throughout the session.  Once
mice demonstrated anticipatory licking, they were transitioned to a peak
procedure (right), where 20% of rewards were omitted on probe trials in order
to estimate their internal representation of expected time of reward delivery. 
(C) Examples of behavioral data.  Individual trial (top) and cumulative Peristimulus time histogram (PSTH) (bottom) of licking behavior during rewarded
(left) and peak (right) trials. 
See also Figure S1. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Behavioral Performance
Mice were trained on a 10-s ﬁxed-time-schedule task (Figures
1A and 1B, left).  Head-ﬁxed mice voluntarily licked a blunt-tipped drinking needle placed in front of their mouth that delivered
a 10% sucrose solution every 10 s.  A solenoid connected to an
Arduino slaved to a custom-written MATLAB Psychtoolbox
scripts controlled sucrose delivery.  No external conditioned
stimulus was presented.  Individual
licking contacts between
mice and the drinking needle were recorded with a contact
lickometer [18]. 
3764 Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017
Figure 2.  Demonstration of Scalar Property
(A) PSTHs for 7. 5-, 10-, and 15-s ﬁxed-time-schedule tasks (n = 3–5 sessions for each condition for three mice).  Vertical dashed lines represent the expected
reward time. 
(B) Accuracy of timing behavior across durations determined by average peak time for individual sessions (n = 13 sessions for each condition). 
(C) Overlay of the behavior from the three ﬁxed-interval durations normalized by max lick rate (y axis) and time of peak lick rate (x axis), demonstrating superimposition (n = 3–5 sessions for each condition for three mice). 
(D) Relative precision of timing behavior as indicated by Weber fraction (n = 13 sessions for each condition).  n. s. , not signiﬁcant (n = 13 sessions; p value > 0. 05,
one-way ANOVA). 
similar stepping dynamics in the lever-pressing behavior of
rats [20]. 
Our single-trial analysis also made it possible to analyze how
changes in internal states during a single session affect timing
behavior [21].  Early in the session, when water-deprived mice
were highly motivated, licking started earlier and ended later
with higher rates (Figure 3C).  As mice became sated, anticipatory licking and bout duration gradually decreased, but the
center of the bout, which reﬂects the expected timing of the
reward delivery, did not change signiﬁcantly.  Bout duration
was strongly modulated by motivational state (n = 10 mice;
p < 0. 05, unpaired t test), but the peak of the licking response
was not (Figure 3D; n = 10 mice; p > 0. 05, unpaired t test). 
Thus, motivational state has a strong impact on the variance
of timing behavior.  Traditionally, data from the entire session
are used to analyze the peak and variance.  Because the
observed variance can be partly attributed to motivational modulation, traditional methods systematically underestimate the
precision of timing behavior. 
Effect of Nigrotectal GABAergic Pathway Stimulation onWe previously showed that optogenetic stimulation of the SNrSC GABAergic pathway disrupts self-paced licking behavior by
uniformly increasing inhibition of deep/intermediate-layer tectal
neurons and interfering with motor commands from SNr neurons
[10].  To examine the function of the SNr-SC GABAergic pathway
in timing, we expressed Cre-dependent ChR2 bilaterally with
AAV5-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-eYFP in the lateral SNr of
Vgat-IRES-Cre mice (Vgat::ChR2 SNr-SC; n = 6) and targeted
the axon terminals in the lateral SC with optic ﬁbers (Figures
4A–4C and S2). 
We used 3 different stimulation protocols to compare the effects of stimulation at different times during the interval: (1) 2 s
to 1 s before reward delivery; (2) 1 s before reward delivery;
and (3) 1 s after the reward delivery.  We also varied the stimulation frequency in each condition: 10, 25, 50, and 100 Hz.  Stimulation of nigrotectal projections signiﬁcantly reduced the number
of licks for the duration of the stimulation in a frequency-dependent manner (Figure 4D; n = 6 mice; p < 0. 05, one-way ANOVA
with post hoc Tukey test).  In agreement with previous work
[10], this result shows that the nigrotectal pathway is important
for both anticipatory and consummatory licking. 
We conducted slice experiments to conﬁrm that photo-stimulation of SNr neurons can evoke spiking in a frequency-dependent manner.  Using the same stimulation frequencies and pulse
width, we showed that SNr neurons were able to follow the pulse
train at high frequencies (Figures 5A and 5B; n = 4 mice).  Spike
ﬁdelity was nearly perfect up to 50 Hz.  At 100 Hz, although
more spiking was produced than at 50 Hz, the spiking could
not follow the stimulation pulse train perfectly, showing a ceiling
effect.  In our experiments, perfect spike ﬁdelity is not necessary
so long as there is a frequency-dependent effect of stimulation. 
In fact, the evoked ﬁring rate at different stimulation frequencies
Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017 3765
Figure 3.  Licking Behavior in Peak Trials
(A) Lick rate from single session aligned to time of previous reward (left; n = 36 trials) or start time of peak trial licking (right; n = 36 trials). 
(B) Same analysis as in (A) except related to the end of licking on peak trials (left, n = 36 trials; right, n = 36 trials). 
(C) Demonstration of motivation effect during a single session.  Licking raster (top) is plotted with start (beige squares) and end (orange squares) times of peak
licking activity calculated using single-trial analysis (see STAR Methods). 
(D) Comparison of within-session licking behavior between the ﬁrst (ﬁrst) and last (last) quartiles.  Both individual data (light blue; n = 10 mice) and group averages
(blue) are shown.  *p value < 0. 05; n. s. , not signiﬁcant (n = 10; paired t test, p value > 0. 05). 
from our slice experiments could explain the behavioral data
from Figure 4 very well.  Using the evoked spiking from the slice
experiments as estimates of in vivo activation of the nigrotectal
pathway, we examined the relationship between spiking and
suppression of licking.  Estimated SNr spiking, based on results
from slice experiments, could account for most variance in the
suppression of licking behavior (Figure 5C; r2 > 0. 90, p < 0. 001
in each).  Thus, higher nigrotectal output results in stronger suppression of licking. 
To test whether nonspeciﬁc effects of laser stimulation or
infection contributed to the reduced licking rate duringstimulation in Vgat::ChR2SNr-SC mice, we injected Vgat-IRESCre mice (n = 5) with an AAV-Flex-eYFP control vector (Vgat::
eYFPSNr-SC).  Under the same experimental conditions, laser
stimulation in the absence of ChR2 had no effect on licking
behavior (Figure S3; n = 6 mice; p > 0. 05, one-way ANOVA). 
Interestingly, photo-stimulation of nigrotectal GABAergic projections at 100 Hz not only transiently suppressed licking but also
altered the timing ofVgat::ChR2 SNr-SC mice (Figure 6A).  Based on the ﬁtting of the
stepping model by the single-trial analysis, we could deﬁne the
start and end of the licking bout on each peak probe trial. 
the response on the nextPhoto-stimulation 1 s after the reward signiﬁcantly delayed the
licking bout on the next trial (Figure 6B; n = 5; p < 0. 05, unpaired
t test).  Photo-stimulation 1 s before the reward signiﬁcantly delayed the center of the bout (peak) and start of the bout (Figure 6C; n = 5; p < 0. 05, unpaired t test).  Yet stimulation at an
earlier point (2 s to 1 s) before the reward delivery resulted in
an earlier peak (Figure 6D; n = 5; p < 0. 05, unpaired t test; Figure S4).  Furthermore, when the stimulation frequency was lowered to 50 Hz 1 s after the reward condition, signiﬁcant delays
in consummatory licking were still evident in three of the four
mice, whereas shifts on subsequent peak trials were only found
in a single mouse (p < 0. 05, unpaired t test; data not shown). 
Taken together, these results strongly suggest that the resetting/pausing effect on peak trials is not due to delays in the termination of consummatory licking.  Cancelation of the current
licking bout is relatively independent of the delay in the next
bout of licking. 
Photo-stimulation 1 s after the reward is thus most effective at
delaying consumption licking (Figures 6 and S3; n = 5; p > 0. 05,
unpaired t test).  There was no correlation between the end
time of the consumption licking and start/end of the licking
bout in both stimulation or no stimulation conditions (Figure S5;
3766 Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017
Figure 4.  Optogenetic Stimulation of SNr-SC Pathway Cancels Licking Behavior
(A) Schematic of surgical and optogenetic procedures. 
(B) Diagram of licking-related circuitry: dorsolateral striatum (DLS); substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr); superior colliculus (SC); and central pattern generators(C) Image of axons within the SC expressing ChR2 after injections of AAV5-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-eYFP into the SNr. 
(D) Schematic of stimulation conditions relative to presentation of reward (top).  Examples (left) and summary (right) of optogenetic stimulation effects on
anticipatory and consummatory licking behavior with Vgat::ChR2SNr-SC mice showing frequency-dependent modulation of licking behavior by optogenetic
stimulation.  *p value < 0. 05 (n = 6 mice; one-way ANOVA, post hoc Tukey test). 
See also Figures S2 and S3A. 
r2 < 0. 10, p > 0. 05).  These results indicate that the nigrotectal
GABAergic projection is also critical
timing behavior. 
Under the same experimental condition, photo-stimulation in
the absence of ChR2 expression in control animals (5 Vgat::
eYFPSNr-SC mice) had no effect on peak test performance (Figure 6; n = 5; p > 0. 05, unpaired t test). 
<Conclusion> DISCUSSION. 
We designed a novel behavioral task for studying interval timing
in mice.  Compared with the traditional freely moving operant
approach, this procedure has three major advantages: (1) by
eliminating complex behavioral sequences observed in freely
moving animals, the behavioral measure was simpliﬁed, allowing
focus on central timing mechanisms with a clearly deﬁned and
quantiﬁable behavioral readout; (2) behavioral training, which
only takes a few days, is more efﬁcient than traditional operant
procedures, which require months of training for the standard
peak procedure; and (3) mice display all the hallmarks of interval
timing, such as the scalar property.  Taking advantage of the
above features, we used optogenetics to interrogate the role of
a deﬁned neural pathway in timing. 
Using quantitative modeling of single-trial behavior, we show
that licking behavior can be described by a stepping model
[19].  The apparent Gaussian distribution of
the behavioral
timing function from peak trials is a result of averaging data
from many trials with variable step onset and offset times
[20].  The start and stop times on peak trials are of particular interest because they reﬂect the animal’s moment-to-moment
estimate of when the reward will arrive on each trial.  All animals
tested showed a ‘‘peak’’ around the timing of the target duration (Figures 2A and 2B).  The variance is also proportional to
the time interval (Figures 2C and 2D).  This scalar property, a
hallmark of interval timing, is thought to be analogous to the
Weber-Fechner law, which has been characterized for other
sensory modalities [4]. 
Traditional timing studies often rely on the ‘‘peak response,’’
which is a result of averaging behavior from many trials.  The
gradual ramping pattern of the anticipatory behavior could be
an artifact of averaging [20], creating a misleading picture of
the underlying mechanisms [22].  Our single-trial analysis produces a more accurate depiction of timing behavior.  We show
that licking behavior during each interval can be described by
a ‘‘stepping’’ model, with abrupt onsets and offsets.  As shown
Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017 3767
Figure 5.  Photo-Stimulation Reliably Generates Spiking in SNr Neurons
(A) Whole-cell current clamp experiments in brain
slices show that SNr projection neurons can follow
pulse trains in a frequency-dependent manner. 
Representative traces at frequencies of 10 Hz,
25 Hz, 50 Hz, and 100 Hz are shown. 
(B) Summary of evoked spiking to photo-stimulation.  Neurons demonstrated increased spiking as
stimulation frequency increased with each increment in stimulation frequency, inducing a signiﬁcantly greater number of spikes (n = 6; p < 0. 05,
one-way ANOVA, post hoc Tukey test) and near
perfect ﬁdelity up to 50 Hz. 
(C) The evoked ﬁring rate can be used to estimate
the in vivo SNr output.  A linear regression analysis
shows that the estimated SNr output can account
for most of the variance in licking behavior from
Figure 4 (r2 > 0. 90; p < 0. 05 in each). 
output from the SNr [10].  Both SNr and
SC show single-unit activity time locked
to licking, but their outputs are out of
phase because the projection is inhibitory.  The descending signal
from the
SNr appears to be a high-level action
command that coordinates voluntary
licking behavior. 
by recent work, event-aligned analysis of averaged data can
lead to inaccurate interpretation of underlying neural mechanisms [19].  Our ﬁnding suggests a stepping dynamic is more
likely to capture the neural activity that generates timing
behavior in accordance with previous in vivo electrophysiological results [10]. 
Our single-trial analysis also demonstrates signiﬁcant motivational modulation of timing behavior (Figure 3).  Early in the
session, when the mouse is highly motivated, the lick bouts
start earlier and end later and the average licking rate is higher. 
Anticipatory licking is gradually reduced during the session,
though consummatory licking bouts remain consistent (Figures
3C and S1).  The motivational state of the animal primarily modulates the spread of the licking bout (i. e. , lick bout duration is
determined by how thirsty the animal
is).  In previous work,
data from the entire session are averaged without regard for
the motivational state.  Consequently, previous work has not
considered the portion of behavioral variability that can be
attributed to motivational states,
thus underestimating the
precision of interval timing in animals.  The Weber fraction, a
common measure of timing precision, is much lower when
the animal is sated (Figure 3D).  Given strong motivational modulation of timing behavior and on basal ganglia output [21, 23],
future studies of timing must take into account internal motivational states. 
We used cell-type-speciﬁc optogenetic manipulation to
study the role of a basal ganglia output pathway that is known
to be critical for licking behavior [10].  Activation of the nigrotectal GABAergic pathway stopped both anticipatory and
consummatory licking behavior.  Previous work showed that
such pausing is due to disruption of the patterned neural
3768 Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017
To test the contribution of this pathway to interval timing, we
selectively stimulated the axon terminals of SNr GABAergic projections neurons in the intermediate/deep layers of the SC.  In
agreement with previous work [7], we showed that both anticipatory and consummatory licking can be precisely and selectively
terminated by photo-stimulation.  More importantly, we found
that photo-stimulation of the nigrotectal pathway not only interrupts ongoing licking but also delays timing of the next licking
bout on peak trials.  Yet stimulation did not affect licking bout
duration (Figure 6).  Therefore, canceling a discrete basal ganglia
output may also pause or reset the oscillatory cycle for precise
timing of future actions that occur up to 10 s later. 
One alternative explanation of our result is that animals can
use the end of consummatory licking as a cue to time the
next reward delivery.  According to this account, any interruption of consummatory licking can delay the start of the next
bout accordingly.  The available evidence, however, does not
support this interpretation.  First, single-trial analysis demonstrates that the end of the consummatory licking does not predict the start of the next bout of licking (Figure S5C).  Second,
delays in the termination of consummatory licking and shifts
in peak trial activity are differentially modulated by stimulation
frequency, with termination of consummatory licking being
more sensitive.  It is also clear from Figure 6A that delays in
the termination of consummatory licking are not necessary for
peak shifts.  A potential explanation is that divergent pathways
are responsible for timing and motor command signals.  SNr
efferents have collateral branches to the thalamus and SC
[24, 25].  Consequently, updates may be sent to cortical regions
through SNr-thalamus collaterals.  This would explain the resilience of timing behavior during lower frequency stimulation. 
Figure 6.  SNr-SC Stimulation Stops Timing
of Licking Behavior in Vgat::ChR2SNr-SC Mice
(A) Example of the resetting effect by photo-stimulation (100 Hz) of
the SNr-SC GABAergic
pathway during 1 s after the reward delivery. 
(B) Effect of photo-stimulation during 1 s after the
reward delivery on start time, end time, bout
length, and peak time.  Photo-stimulation signiﬁcantly delayed start time, end time, and peak, but
not bout length. 
(C) Effect of photo-stimulation during 1 s before
the reward delivery on start time, end time, bout
length, and peak time.  Photo-stimulation signiﬁcantly delayed start time and peak, but not end
time and bout length. 
(D) Effect of photo-stimulation during 2 s to 1 s
prior to the reward delivery on start time, end time,
bout length, and peak time.  Photo-stimulation
signiﬁcantly advanced end and peak time, but not
start time and bout length.  *p value < 0. 05 (n = 5;
unpaired t test); n. s, not signiﬁcant (n = 5 mice,
unpaired t test). 
See also Figures S3B and S4–S6. 
licking (Figure 3).  Finally, the phase of
the oscillation is adjusted by the reward
feedback as well as descending motor
commands to initiate licking [2]. 
In conclusion, we introduced a novel
behavioral task for the rapid acquisition
of interval timing behavior using licking
as a behavioral
readout.  Quantitative
analysis of single-trial behavior demonstrated clear motivational modulation of
timing behavior.  Using optogenetic stimulation of the nigrotectal pathway, we
could selectively delay the timing of the
next bout of licking, suggesting that basal ganglia output may
play a role not only in initiating actions but also in adjusting central timing mechanisms. 
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
B Experimental Model and Subject Details
d METHOD DETAILS
B Viral Constructs
B Surgery
B Fixed-time schedule task
B Peak probe trials
B Optogenetic stimulation
B Whole-cell patch clamp recordings in brain slices
B Histology
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Single-trial analysis
B Scalar Timing Analysis
Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017 3769
Thus, it is possible that the nigrotectal pathway not only generates high-level motor commands for licking but also efference
copies to higher levels that adjust the oscillatory cycle based
on a variety of feedback signals.  When such signals are interrupted by cancelling licking behavior, it is possible to pause
the timing mechanism.  Future studies using cell-type-speciﬁc
manipulation of the upstream circuits will be needed to test
this hypothesis. 
According to the scalar expectancy theory of timing, pulses
from a pacemaker are accumulated and compared to a reference memory, and the ratio between the currentreading’’ and remembered time is used to generate behavior
[1].  The present results suggest that this timing mechanismfully dissociable from high-level motor commands
[26–28].  The corticostriatal circuit, which is upstream of the nigrotectal pathway, can generate oscillatory processes that act
as the internal clock [2, 29].  The period of this oscillator,
perhaps responsible for ‘‘clock speed,’’ is adjusted according
to the relevant perceptual inputs (e. g. , rewards at regular intervals).  The amplitude of the cycle may be proportional to the lick
rate or behavioral vigor.  As suggested by our single-trial analysis, this parameter is modulated by the motivational state
and appears to set thresholds for the initiation of bouts of
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes six ﬁgures and can be found with this
article online at https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 003. 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K. T. , N. A. L. , W. H. M. , and H. H. Y.  designed research; K. T. , N. A. L. , G. D. R. W. ,
N. K. , H. E. L. , and D. L.  performed research; K. T. , N. A. L. , and H. H. Y.  analyzed
data; and K. T. , N. A. L. , G. D. R. W. , and H. H. Y.  wrote the paper. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(JSPS) KAKENHI grant 16J01187 (K. T. ), JSPS Postdoctoral Fellowships
(K. T. ), the Uehara Memorial Foundation (K. T. ), and NIH grant NS094754
(H. H. Y. ).  We would like to thank Dr.  Garret Stuber for advice on the head-ﬁxed
behavioral setup, Elijah Petter and Dr.  Jun Takatoh for discussion, and Erin
Gaidis and Albin John for technical assistance. 
Received: July 27, 2017
Revised: August 29, 2017
Accepted: November 1, 2017
Published: November 30, 2017
REFERENCES
1.  Gibbon, J. , Church, R. M. , and Meck, W. H.  (1984).  Scalar timing in memory.  Ann.  N Y Acad.  Sci.  423, 52–77. 
2.  Buhusi, C. V. , and Meck, W. H.  (2005).  What makes us tick? Functional and
neural mechanisms of interval timing.  Nat.  Rev.  Neurosci.  6, 755–765. 
3.  Gouveˆ a, T. S. , Monteiro, T. , Motiwala, A. , Soares, S. , Machens, C. , and
Paton, J. J.  (2015).  Striatal dynamics explain duration judgments.  eLife 4,4.  Merchant, H. , Harrington, D. L. , and Meck, W. H.  (2013).  Neural basis of the
perception and estimation of time.  Annu.  Rev.  Neurosci.  36, 313–336. 
5.  Treisman, M.  (1963).  Temporal discrimination and the indifference interval. 
Implications for a model of the ‘‘internal clock’’.  Psychol.  Monogr.  77,6.  Meck, W. H.  (2006).  Neuroanatomical localization of an internal clock: a
functional link between mesolimbic, nigrostriatal, and mesocortical dopaminergic systems.  Brain Res.  1109, 93–107. 
7.  Coull, J. T. , Vidal, F. , Nazarian, B. , and Macar, F.  (2004).  Functional anatomy of the attentional modulation of time estimation.  Science 303,
1506–1508. 
8.  Yin, B. , and Meck, W. H.  (2014).  Comparison of interval timing behaviour
in mice following dorsal or ventral hippocampal lesions with mice having
d-opioid receptor gene deletion.  Philos.  Trans.  R.  Soc.  Lond.  B Biol.  Sci. 
369, 20120466. 
9.  Buhusi, C. V. , Aziz, D. , Winslow, D. , Carter, R. E. , Swearingen, J. E. , and
timing in
timing accuracy and scalarBuhusi, M. C. 
C57BL/6 mice.  Behav.  Neurosci.  123, 1102–1113. 
Interval
14.  Redgrave, P. , Marrow, L. , and Dean, P.  (1992).  Topographical organization
of the nigrotectal projection in rat: evidence for segregated channels. 
Neuroscience 50, 571–595. 
15.  Grillner, S. , and Robertson, B.  (2015).  The basal ganglia downstream control of brainstem motor centres–an evolutionarily conserved strategy.  Curr. 
Opin.  Neurobiol.  33, 47–52. 
16.  Redgrave, P. , Dean, P. , Donohoe, T. P. , and Pope, S. G.  (1980).  Superior
colliculus lesions selectively attenuate apomorphine-induced oral stereotypy: a possible role for the nigrotectal pathway.  Brain Res.  196, 541–546. 
17.  Bakhurin, K. I. , Goudar, V. , Shobe, J. L. , Claar, L. D. , Buonomano, D. V. , and
Masmanidis, S. C.  (2017).  Differential encoding of time by prefrontal and
striatal network dynamics.  J.  Neurosci.  37, 854–870. 
18.  Rossi, M. A. , and Yin, H. H.  (2015).  Elevated dopamine alters consummatory pattern generation and increases behavioral variability during
learning.  Front.  Integr.  Nuerosci.  9, 37. 
19.  Latimer, K. W. , Yates, J. L. , Meister, M. L. , Huk, A. C. , and Pillow, J. W. 
(2015).  NEURONAL MODELING.  Single-trial spike trains in parietal cortex
reveal discrete steps during decision-making.  Science 349, 184–187. 
20.  Mello, G. B. , Soares, S. , and Paton, J. J.  (2015).  A scalable population code
for time in the striatum.  Curr.  Biol.  25, 1113–1122. 
21.  Ludvig, E. A. , Balci, F. , and Spetch, M. L.  (2011).  Reward magnitude and
timing in pigeons.  Behav.  Processes 86, 359–363. 
22.  Gallistel, C. R. , Fairhurst, S. , and Balsam, P.  (2004).  The learning curve:
implications of a quantitative analysis.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA 101,
13124–13131. 
23.  Rossi, M. A. , Fan, D. , Barter, J. W. , and Yin, H. H.  (2013).  Bidirectional modulation of substantia nigra activity by motivational state.  PLoS ONE 8,24.  Deniau, J. M. , Kitai, S. T. , Donoghue, J. P. , and Grofova, I.  (1982).  Neuronal
interactions in the substantia nigra pars reticulata through axon collaterals
of the projection neurons.  An electrophysiological and morphological
study.  Exp.  Brain Res.  47, 105–113. 
25.  Beckstead, R. M.  (1983).  Long collateral branches of substantia nigra pars
reticulata axons to thalamus, superior colliculus and reticular formation in
monkey and cat.  Multiple retrograde neuronal labeling with ﬂuorescent
dyes.  Neuroscience 10, 767–779. 
26.  Yin, H. H.  (2014).  Action, time and the basal ganglia.  Philos.  Trans.  R.  Soc. 
Lond.  B Biol.  Sci.  369, 20120473. 
27.  Barter, J. W. , Castro, S. , Sukharnikova, T. , Rossi, M. A. , and Yin, H. H. 
the substantia nigra in posture control.  Eur.  J. 
(2014).  The role of
Neurosci.  39, 1465–1473. 
28.  Barter, J. W. , Li, S. , Sukharnikova, T. , Rossi, M. A. , Bartholomew, R. A. , and
Yin, H. H.  (2015).  Basal ganglia outputs map instantaneous position coordinates during behavior.  J.  Neurosci.  35, 2703–2716. 
29.  Simen, P. , Balci, F. , de Souza, L. , Cohen, J. D. , and Holmes, P.  (2011).  A
model of interval timing by neural integration.  J.  Neurosci.  31, 9238–9253. 
30.  Vong, L. , Ye, C. , Yang, Z. , Choi, B. , Chua, S. , Jr. , and Lowell, B. B.  (2011). 
Leptin action on GABAergic neurons prevents obesity and reduces inhibitory tone to POMC neurons.  Neuron 71, 142–154. 
31.  Brainard, D. H.  (1997).  The psychophysics toolbox.  Spat.  Vis.  10, 433–436. 
32.  Slotnick, B.  (2009).  A simple 2-transistor touch or lick detector circuit. 
J.  Exp.  Anal.  Behav.  91, 253–255. 
10.  Rossi, M. A. , Li, H. E. , Lu, D. , Kim, I. H. , Bartholomew, R. A. , Gaidis, E. ,
Barter, J. W. , Kim, N. , Cai, M. T. , Soderling, S. H. , and Yin, H. H.  (2016).  A
GABAergic nigrotectal pathway for coordination of drinking behavior. 
Nat.  Neurosci.  19, 742–748. 
33.  Guo, Z. V. , Hires, S. A. , Li, N. , O’Connor, D. H. , Komiyama, T. , Ophir, E. ,
Huber, D. , Bonardi, C. , Morandell, K. , Gutnisky, D. , et al. Procedures for behavioral experiments in head-ﬁxed mice.  PLoS ONE 9,11.  Travers, J. B. , Dinardo, L. A. , and Karimnamazi, H.  (1997).  Motor and pre34.  Paxinos, G. , and Franklin, K.  (2003).  The Mouse Brain in Stereotaxic
motor mechanisms of licking.  Neurosci.  Biobehav.  Rev.  21, 631–647. 
Coordinates (Academic Press). 
12.  Li, N. , Chen, T. W. , Guo, Z. V. , Gerfen, C. R. , and Svoboda, K.  (2015).  A mo35.  Cheng, K. , and Westwood, R.  (1993).  Analysis of single trials in pigeons’
tor cortex circuit for motor planning and movement.  Nature 519, 51–56. 
timing performance.  J.  Exp.  Psychol.  Anim.  Behav.  Process.  19, 56–67. 
13.  Salamone, J. D. , Mahan, K. , and Rogers, S.  (1993).  Ventrolateral striatal
feeding and food handling in rats. 
dopamine depletions impair
Pharmacol.  Biochem.  Behav.  44, 605–610. 
36.  Church, R. M. , Meck, W. H. , and Gibbon, J.  (1994).  Application of scalar
timing theory to individual trials.  J.  Exp.  Psychol.  Anim.  Behav.  Process. 
20, 135–155. 
3770 Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017
STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
Antibodies
Chicken polyclonal anti-GFPAbcam
IDENTIFIER
Cat# ab13970; RRID: AB_300798
Goat polyclonal anti-Chicken Alexa Fluor 488
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# A-11039; RRID: AB_2534096Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat# D1306
Bacterial and Virus Strains
AAV5-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-eYFP
AAV5-EF1a-DIO-eYFP
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Mouse: Vgat-IRES-Cre: Slc32a1tm2(cre)Lowl
Oligonucleotides
Primers for mouse Vgat-IRES-Cre
(F: GGTCGATGCAACGAGTGATGAGG;
R: GCCAGATTACGTATATCCTGGCAG)
Software and Algorithms
MATLAB 2015b
UNC Vector Core
UNC Vector CoreN/A
Jackson Laboratory
Mouse Strain: 016962
Integrated DNA TechnologiesThe MathWorks
https://www. mathworks. com/products. html?s_
tid=gn_ps
https://www. graphpad. com/scientiﬁcsoftware/prism/The GraphPad Software
StepRampMCMCMultiClamp 700B Ampliﬁer
Digidata 1440A Digitizer
LED Driverhttps://github. com/pillowlab/StepRampMCMC
Molecular Devices
Molecular Devices
ThorlabsN/ACONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to the Lead Contact, Henry H.  Yin (hy43@duke. edu). 
Experimental Model and Subject Details
All data were collected from 16 adult Vgat-IRES-Cre mice (Slc32a1tm2(cre)Lowl, Jackson labs).  Subjects included 10 male and 6 female
mice with experimental and control groups split evenly between the sexes.  These mice expressed Cre-recombinase only in
GABAergic neurons [30].  In all behavioral experiments, mice were maintained on a 12:12 light cycle.  All experiments were conducted
during the light phase of the animal’s light cycle.  Mice were water deprived and received a 10% sucrose solution during testing.  Their
weights were monitored on a daily basis, with additional water given post experimental training as needed.  Mice had unrestricted
access to food in their home cages.  All experimental procedures were approved by the Duke University Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee. 
METHOD DETAILS
Viral Constructs
AAV5-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-eYFP and AAV5-EF1a-DIO-eYFP were obtained from the University of North Carolina Vector Core. Mice were anesthetized with 1. 0 to 2. 0% isoﬂurane mixed with 1. 0 L/min of oxygen for surgical procedures and placed into a stereotactic frame (David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA).  Adult Vgat-IRES-Cre mice were randomly assigned to Vgat::ChR2SNr-SC (n = 6, 3
males, 3 females, 8-15 weeks old) or Vgat::eYFPSNr-SC groups (n = 6; 3 males, 3 females).  Craniotomies were made bilaterally above the
lateral SNr and lateral SC.  Virus was bilaterally microinjected into the SNr (0. 6 mL each hemisphere, AP:  3. 2 mm relative to bregma,
ML: ± 1. 6 mm relative to bregma, DV:  4. 3 mm from skull surface) using a custom microinjector and microinfusion pump
Current Biology 27, 3763–3770. e1–e3, December 18, 2017 e1
(PHD 2000, Harvard Apparatus).  To target nigrotectal axon terminals, mice were bilaterally implanted with custom made optic ﬁbers
aimed directly above the lateral SC (AP:  3. 5 mm relative to bregma, ML: ± 1. 