
Reward anticipation (‘wanting’) is crucial for human adaptation to
the environment (Bubic, von Cramon, & Schubotz, 2010).  The ability to
predict future motivational events permits us to organize our behavior
proactively to cope with the impact of those events.  For instance, gain
anticipation can promote approach behavior whereas loss anticipation
can promote avoidance behavior (Knutson & Greer, 2008).  On the other
hand, dysfunction in reward anticipation has been identiﬁed as a critical contributor to psychopathologies such as schizophrenia (Gard,
Kring, Gard, Horan, & Green, 2007), depression (Treadway & Zald,
2011), and addictive behaviors (Robinson & Berridge, 2008). taskincentive
A well-validated task designed to evaluate reward anticipation is the
monetary
(Knutson, Westdorp,
Kaiser, & Hommer, 2000), which has been extensively used across
healthy and clinical populations in conjunction with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; Lutz & Widmer, 2014).  In a typical MID
task trial, participants initially observe a cue signaling trial information
(i. e. , gain, loss, or neutral), followed by a delayed period during which
the participants prepare a motor response for an imperative visual
target.  Following the motor response, another interval is provided
striatum, anterior
during which the participants wait for the outcome of their performance on that trial.  In healthy individuals, reward anticipation mainly
implicates the mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic pathway,
includinginsula, and anterior cingulate cortex
(Knutson & Greer, 2008).  However, despite its excellent spatial resolution, fMRI cannot provide the necessary temporal resolution to fully
characterize the temporal dynamics of reward anticipation in the
human brain.  Speciﬁcally, it remains largely unexplored whether those
sub-stages (e. g. , cue evaluation, motor preparation, and feedback anticipation) coarsely labelled reward anticipation are dissociable on the
neural level. 
Electroencephalography (EEG) with its superior temporal resolution
provides a narration of distinct psychological processes as they unfold
during reward anticipation millisecond-by-millisecond.  Three anticipatory slow waves are associated with reward anticipation.  The ﬁrst
slow negative-going wave, labelled the contingent negative variation
(CNV), is typically observed between a warning stimulus (cue) and an
imperative stimulus (target) and is maximal at central sites (Walter,
Cooper, Aldridge, McCallum, & Winter, 1964).  The CNV is believed to
reﬂect neural activity within the thalamo-cortico-striatal network and
has been linked with anticipatory attention, motivation, as well as
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, Dalian Medical University, No.  9 West Section, Lvshun South Road, Dalian 116044, China. 
E-mail address: zhengya@dmu. edu. cn (Y.  Zheng). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 011
Received 6 January 2017; Received in revised form 13 July 2017; Accepted 17 July 2017
Available online 21 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
Y.  Zhang Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 89–97
motor preparation (Brunia, van Boxtel, & Böcker, 2012; Fan Name,
2007).  Analogous to the CNV, a broad slow negative-going wave during
the waiting period of a motivationally relevant stimulus (e. g. , the
period between the target and feedback in the MID task), called the
stimulus-preceding negativity (SPN), is manifest as a plateau-shaped
distribution at
frontal areas with a right hemisphere dominance
(Brunia, Hackley, van Boxtel, Kotani, & Ohgami, 2011).  The most likely
neural generator of the SPN, given its frontotemporal focus, is the right
anterior insula (Bocker, Brunia, & van den Berg-Lenssen, 1994; Brunia,
de Jong, van den Berg-Lenssen, & Paans, 2000).  In contrast to the CNV,
the SPN reﬂects anticipatory processing more purely due to the exclusion of motor preparation in the waiting period (van Boxtel & Böcker,
2004).  Finally, incentive cues during the cue-evaluation stage often
elicit a P3 component (i. e. , the cue-P3), a positive-going wave peaking
between 300 and 600 ms at parietal sites (Broyd Name, 2012; Goldstein
Name, 2006).  The cue-P3 is generally associated with attentional resources for stimulus evaluation based on motivational signiﬁcance
(Nieuwenhuis, Aston-Jones, & Cohen, 2005). 
Previous research has thus identiﬁed three ERP correlates of reward
anticipation: the cue-P3 during the cue-evaluation stage, the CNV
during the motor-preparation stage, and the SPN during the feedbackanticipation stage.  However, it remains to be determined whether these
anticipatory ERP components reﬂect a common neural process or a set
of distinct neural processes.  Supporting the former hypothesis, all these
ERP components have a close association with the mesocorticolimbic
dopaminergic pathway.  Speciﬁcally, previous research has demonstrated that the dopaminergic system plays a critical role in the generation of the P3 (Pogarell Name, 2011; Takeshita & Ogura, 1994) and
that P3 amplitude variation is correlated with brain activity in the
ventral striatum (Pfabigan Name, 2014).  Similarly, CNV amplitude is
inﬂuenced by dopaminergic manipulation (Linssen Name, 2011) and is
associated with ventral striatal activity (Plichta Name, 2013; but see
Pfabigan Name, 2014).  Finally, recent research has shown that the SPN
is moderated by genetic variation in dopamine (Foti & Hajcak, 2012)
and that SPN amplitude is reduced in individuals with Parkinson’s
disease, a disorder with well-known deterioration of dopamine pathway
(Mattox, Valle-Inclan, & Hackley, 2006). 
However, despite the fact that all these anticipatory ERP components are associated with reward anticipation (Broyd Name, 2012;
Goldstein Name, 2006; Gruber & Otten, 2010; Kotani, Hiraku,
Suda, & Aihara, 2001; Krebs, Boehler, Appelbaum, & Woldorﬀ, 2013;
Schevernels, Krebs, Santens, Woldorﬀ, & Boehler, 2014; van den Berg,
Krebs, Lorist, & Woldorﬀ, 2014), recent evidence suggests that they are
dissociable in terms of reward valence (i. e. , gain anticipation vs.  loss
anticipation).  On the one hand, the CNV appears to be insensitive to
reward valence such that it is comparable for gain and loss anticipation
(Novak & Foti, 2015; Pfabigan Name, 2014).  On the other hand, both the
cue-P3 and SPN seem to be modulated by reward valence.  The cue-P3 is
observed with larger amplitude after gain cues relative to loss cues
(Pfabigan Name, 2014; Santesso Name, 2012; Zheng Name, 2017; but see
Schmitt, Ferdinand, & Kray, 2015).  Similarly, the SPN appears to be
more sensitive in gain context as compared to loss context (Ohgami
Name, 2006; Zheng, Li, Wang, Wu, & Liu, 2015). 
To address this issue, we ﬁrst investigated whether the anticipatory
ERP components (i. e. , the cue-P3, CNV, and SPN) elicited in an MID
task were modulated by incentive valence (gain vs.  loss anticipation)
commonly or selectively.  If these ERP components are driven by
common neural mechanisms, then they should be modulated by incentive valence similarly.  Moreover, given its close relationship with
the mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic pathway, these anticipatory ERP
components should also relate to other measures of the dompaminergic
pathway. 
approach motivation
(Salamone & Correa, 2012).  Here, we then examined the relationship
between the ERP correlates of gain anticipation and a novel behavioral
index of approach motivation as measured by the eﬀort expenditure for
Schwartzman,Buckholtz,
Treadway,(EEfRT;suchindexLambert, & Zald, 2009) to further determine whether these ERP components were driven by common or distinct neural mechanisms.  If they
reﬂect similar neural substrates, the gain-anticipation ERP components
should be associated with the behavioral index of approach motivation
in a similar way.  Otherwise, diﬀerent patterns should be observed. 
As a human analog of rodent paradigms designed to evaluate the
approach motivational functioning of the dopamine system (Salamone,
Cousins, McCullough, Carriero, & Berkowitz, 1994), the EEfRT requires
participants to make a choice between a low-eﬀort low-reward task and
a high-eﬀort high-reward task during a series of trials.  Participants’
willingness to expend eﬀort (i. e. , approach motivation) increases following d-amphetamine administration (Wardle, Treadway, Mayo,
Zald, & de Wit, 2011), is related to individual diﬀerences in dopamine
receptor sensitivity (Treadway Name, 2012), and left frontal cortical
activity (Hughes, Yates, Morton, & Smillie, 2015), as well as anticipatory pleasure trait (Geaney, Treadway, & Smillie, 2015).  Moreover,
these associations appear to be speciﬁc to trials with low probability of
reward receipt, indicating that dopamine mitigates perceived eﬀort
costs when pursuing large but unlikely rewards. 
In the current study, participants performed both an MID task and
an EEfRT.  During the MID task, the participants were presented with
incentive cues indicating that they would either win or lose monetary
(i. e. , the cue-evaluation stage), then waited for a variable preparatory
period (i. e. , the motor-preparation stage) and responded to a rapidly
presented target to either won or avoided losing money, then waited for
another delay period (i. e. , the feedback-anticipation stage) to see the
outcome of their performance.  During the EEfRT, the participants were
presented with a series of choices in which they could expend either
minimal eﬀort to obtain a small reward or greater eﬀort to obtain a
larger reward with varying probability levels of reward receipt.  In light
of the ﬁndings reviewed above, we hypothesized that the cue-P3 and
SPN, rather than the CNV, would be sensitive to gain anticipation. 
Importantly, higher gain cue-P3 and SPN amplitudes would be associated with a greater willingness to expend eﬀort (i. e. , a greater proportion of hard-task choices in the EEfRT) for rewards especially when
reward probability was low.  No clear predictions were made for the
CNV because of its various functional signiﬁcances.  If the CNV reﬂects
gain anticipation, then it would also be associated with approach motivation as the cue-P3 and SPN. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Participants
Fifty-six right-handed undergraduates (30 females and 26 males,
17–23 years of age) participated in this study.  All had normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity and reported no history of psychiatric or
neurological disorders.  The participants received a base payment of Ұ30
(roughly equal to $4. 5) for participation, as well as a bonus money
based on their performance in the two tasks (see details below).  All the
participants provided written, informed consent.  This study was approved by the Dalian Medical University Institutional Review Board. 
2. 2.  Procedures
The participants were seated in a dimly lit and sound-attenuating
chamber and performed both the MID task and the EEfRT.  The EEfRT
was always performed after the MID task.  EEG data were collected only
during the MID task. 
2. 3.  ERP task—the MID task
In order to elicit anticipatory brain activity, the participants performed a modiﬁed version of the MID task (Knutson Name, 2000),
during which they could maximize rewards and minimize losses by
responding as quickly as possible to a visual target.  On each trialY.  Zhang Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 89–97
Fig.  1.  Trial structures of the MID task (A) and the EEfRT (B).  ITI = intertrial interval. 
(Fig.  1A), the participants were ﬁrst presented with one of three cues
for 1000 ms signaling potential monetary gain (a plus sign), monetary
loss (a minus sign), or no money at stake (an empty circle).  Following a
jittered interstimulus interval (ISI; 2000–2500 ms), a white square was
presented as the target stimulus, during which the participants were
instructed to respond by pressing a button as fast as possible.  Initially,
the duration of the target was set to 250 ms and then was adjusted
between 100 and 400 ms based on individual reaction times for each
incentive condition.  Target duration was decreased by 25 ms following
a successful response (i. e. , a response that occurred while the target was
still on the screen) and was increased by 25 ms following an unsuccessful response (i. e. , a response that occurred either before or after
target presentation).  This staircase procedure resulted in an approximately 50% success rate for all three conditions (gain: 50. 05% ± 0. 92;
neutral: 50. 11% ± 0. 89; loss: 50. 01% ± 1. 20).  Following a second
ISI (2000 ms), the participants were shown performance feedback for
1000 ms.  The successful response was signaled by a white tick and the
unsuccessful response by a white cross.  On gain trials, the tick feedback
indicated a winning of Ұ1 whereas the cross feedback indicated a
wining of Ұ0.  On loss trials, the tick feedback indicated a loss of Ұ0
whereas the cross feedback indicated a loss of Ұ1.  On neutral trials,
both tick and cross feedbacks resulted in Ұ0.  Each trial ended with an
intertrial interval varying from 1200 to 1500 ms. 
The task consisted of 240 trials divided into four blocks (60 trials
each), and a rest break was provided between blocks.  The participants
were endowed with an initial bankroll of Ұ30 and were told that they
should respond as fast as possible to maximize their ﬁnal bankroll.  Prior
to the formal experiment, the participants played a practice version of
the task with 18 trials for familiarization. 
After blocks 2 and 4, the participants rated their aﬀective responses
during the anticipation and receipt of outcomes under all three incentive conditions.  The aﬀective responses were collected via a 5-pointscale in terms of valence (1 = negative and 5 = positive) and arousal
(1 = low intensity and 5 = high intensity). 
The EEG was recorded continuously using an electrode cap with 64
Ag/AgCI electrodes mounted according to the extended International
10/20 system.  The signals were recorded using a left mastoid reference
electrode and re-referenced oﬄine to the mean of the activity at the left
and right mastoids.  The horizontal electrooculogram (EOG) was recorded as the voltage between two electrodes placed at the external
canthi of each eye and was used to detect horizontal eye movements. 
The vertical EOG was recorded as the voltage between two electrodes
placed above and below the left eye to measure vertical eye movements
and blinks.  The EEG and EOG were ampliﬁed using a Neuroscan
SynAmp2 ampliﬁer with a low-pass of 100 Hz in DC acquisition mode,
and were digitized at a sample rate of 500 Hz.  Electrode impedance was
kept under 5 KΩ. 
The EEG data were preprocessed and analyzed in MATLAB 2014a
using EEGLAB toolbox (Delorme & Makeig, 2004).  The EEG data were
ﬁltered with a low-pass of 30 Hz (roll-oﬀ 6 dB/octave).  For the cue-P3
and CNV, the signals were epoched from −4000 to 3000 ms relative to
cue onset with the activity from −200 to 0 ms serving as the baseline. 
For the SPN, the signal was epoched from −4000 to 3000 ms relative to
feedback onset with the activity from −1900 to −1700 ms serving as
the baseline.  All epoched data were screened manually for artifacts
(e. g. , spikes, drifts, and non-biological signals) and then were subjected(runica;
Delorme & Makeig, 2004; Jung Name, 2001).  Individual components
were inspected and blink components were removed.  To remove additional artifacts, we utilized a semi-automated procedure (Foti,
Weinberg, Dien, & Hajcak, 2011), with artifacts deﬁned as a step more
than 50 μV between sample points, a voltage diﬀerence exceeding
200 μV within a trial, or a maximum voltage diﬀerence less than 0. 5 μV
within 100-ms intervals.  Finally, the epoched data were averaged
independent
componentinformax
analysis
Y.  Zhang Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 89–97
Fig.  2.  Grand average ERP waveforms from a parietal ROI
during the cue-evaluation stage, a central ROI during the
motor-preparation stage, and a right frontotemporal ROI
during the feedback-anticipation stage, where the shaded
areas depict the time windows during which the cue-P3, CNV,
and SPN were scored, and scalp topographies for the cue-P3
(400–550 ms), CNV (2800–3000 ms), and SPN (−200 toacross trials for each condition.  For ﬁgures, the SPN and CNV data were
ﬁltered with a low-pass cutoﬀ at 7 Hz, as implemented using ERPLAB
toolbox (Lopez-Calderon & Luck, 2014). 
ERP components were quantiﬁed using a region-of-interest (ROI)
approach (Fig.  2).  The cue-P3 was measured as the mean activity from
400 to 550 ms post cue onset over a parietal ROI (P1, Pz, P2, POz) and
the CNV from 2800 to 3000 ms post cue onset over central ROI (C1, Cz,
C2, FCz).  Given its multiple sources throughout the brain, the SPN was
measured as the mean activity from −200 to 0 ms before feedback
onset over frontotemporal (FT: F7/8, FT7/8, T7/8), laterofrontocentral
(LFC: F5/6, FC5/6, C5/6), frontocentral (FC: F3/4, FC3/4, C3/4), and
mediofrontocentral (MFC: F1/2, FC1/2, C1/2) ROIs; these ROIs have
been used in previous
(Ohgami, Kotani, Arai,
SPN studies
Kiryu, & Inoue, 2014; Ohgami Name, 2006). 