Local Signals in Mouse Horizontal Cell DendritesHighlights
d Light-evoked Ca2+ signals in horizontal cell dendrites reﬂect
opsin gradient
d Chromatic preferences in neighboring dendritic tips vary
markedly
d Mouse horizontal cells process cone photoreceptor inputd Local horizontal cell feedback shapes the temporal
properties of cone outputCamille A.  Chapot, Christian Behrens,
Luke E.  Rogerson, . . . , Philipp Berens,
Thomas Euler, Timm Schubert
Correspondence
thomas. euler@cin. uni-tuebingen. detimm. schubert@cin. uni-tuebingen. deIn Brief
Chapot Name show that local light
responses in mouse horizontal cell
dendrites inherit properties, including
chromatic preference, from the
presynaptic cone photoreceptor,
suggesting that their dendrites can
provide private feedback to cones, for
instance, to shape the temporal ﬁltering
properties of the cone synapse. 
Chapot Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3603–3615
December 4, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 050
Current BiologyLocal Signals in Mouse Horizontal Cell Dendrites
Camille A.  Chapot,1,2,3 Christian Behrens,1,2,3,4 Luke E.  Rogerson,1,2,3,4 Tom Baden,1,5 Sinziana Pop,1,2,3
Philipp Berens,1,2,4 Thomas Euler,1,2,4,* and Timm Schubert1,2,6,*
1Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
2Center for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
3Graduate Training Centre of Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
4Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of Tu¨ bingen, 72076 Tu¨ bingen, Germany
5School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RH, UK
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: thomas. euler@cin. uni-tuebingen. de (T. E. ), timm. schubert@cin. uni-tuebingen. de (T. S. )
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 050The mouse retina contains a single type of horizontal
cell, a GABAergic interneuron that samples from all
cone photoreceptors within reach and modulates
their glutamatergic output via parallel
feedback
mechanisms.  Because horizontal cells form an electrically coupled network, they have been implicated
in global signal processing, such as large-scale
contrast enhancement.  Recently, it has been proposed that horizontal cells can also act locally at the
level of individual cone photoreceptors.  To test this
possibility physiologically, we used two-photon microscopy to record light stimulus-evoked Ca2+ signals
in cone axon terminals and horizontal cell dendrites as
well as glutamate release in the outer plexiform layer. 
By selectively stimulating the two mouse cone opsins
with green and UV light, we assessed whether signals
from individual cones remain isolated within horizontal cell dendritic tips or whether they spread across
the dendritic arbor.  Consistent with the mouse’s opsin
expression gradient, we found that the Ca2+ signals
recorded from dendrites of dorsal horizontal cells
were dominated by M-opsin and those of ventral
horizontal cells by S-opsin activation.  The signals
measured in neighboring horizontal cell dendritic
tips varied markedly in their chromatic preference,
arguing against global processing.  Rather, our experimental data and results from biophysically realistic
modeling support the idea that horizontal cells can
process cone input locally, extending the classical
view of horizontal cell function.  Pharmacologically
removing horizontal cells from the circuitry reduced
the sensitivity of the cone signal to low frequencies,
suggesting that local horizontal cell feedback shapes
the temporal properties of cone output. 