Tension-Dependent Stretching Activates ZO-1 to
Control the Junctional Localization of Its InteractorsGraphical AbstractDomenica Spadaro, Shimin Le,
Thierry Laroche, Isabelle Mean,
Lionel Jond, Jie Yan, Sandra Citi
Correspondence
sandra. citi@unige. ch
In Brief
Spadaro Name use super-resolution
microscopy to show that ZO-1, a protein
that connects tight junction membrane
proteins to the actin cytoskeleton, exists
in either stretched or folded
conformations, depending on
actomyosin-dependent force, resulting in
changes in the localization, stability, and
downstream signaling of its interactors. 
Highlights
d The tight junction protein ZO-1 exists in stretched and folded
conformations
d Actin organization, myosin activity, and heterodimerization
control ZO-1 conformation
d The stretched conformation of ZO-1 recruits DbpA and
occludin to junctions
d Barrier function and proliferation are controlled by
actomyosin through ZO proteins
Spadaro Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3783–3795
December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 014
Current BiologyTension-Dependent Stretching Activates
ZO-1 to Control the Junctional
Localization of Its Interactors
Domenica Spadaro,1,2 Shimin Le,3,4 Thierry Laroche,5 Isabelle Mean,1,2 Lionel Jond,1,2 Jie Yan,3,4 and Sandra Citi1,2,6,*
1Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Sciences
2Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva (iGE3)
University of Geneva, 30 Quai Ernest Ansermet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
3Department of Physics
4Mechanobiology Institute
National University of Singapore, 5A Engineering Drive 1, Singapore 117411, Singapore
5EPFL School of Life Sciences PTBIOP, Station 19, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: sandra. citi@unige. ch
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 014Tensile forces regulate epithelial homeostasis, but
the molecular mechanisms behind this regulation
are poorly understood.  Using structured illumination microscopy and proximity ligation assays, we
show that the tight junction protein ZO-1 exists in
stretched and folded conformations within epithelial cells, depending on actomyosin-generated
force.  We also show that ZO-1 and ZO-2 regulate
the localization of the transcription factor DbpA
and the tight junction membrane protein occludin
in a manner that depends on the organization of
the actin cytoskeleton, myosin-II activity, and substrate stiffness, resulting in modulation of gene
expression, cell proliferation, barrier function, and
cyst morphogenesis.  Pull-down experiments show
that interactions between N-terminal (ZPSG) and
C-terminal domains of ZO-1 prevent binding of
DbpA to the ZPSG, suggesting that force-dependent
interactions regulate ZPSG
binding to ligands within cells.  In vivo and in vitro
experiments also suggest that ZO-1 heterodimerization with ZO-2 promotes the stretched conformation and ZPSG interaction with ligands.  Magnetic
tweezers single-molecule experiments suggest
that pN-scale tensions (2–4 pN) are sufﬁcient to
maintain the stretched conformation of ZO-1, while
keeping its structured domains intact, and that
5–20 pN force is required to disrupt the interaction
between the extreme C-terminal and the ZPSG
domains of ZO-1.  We propose that tensile forces
regulate epithelial homeostasis by activating ZO
proteins through stretching, to control the junctional recruitment and downstream signaling of
their interactors. 
intra-molecular
INTRODUCTION
Extrinsic and intrinsic forces control the conformation of mechanosensing proteins at cadherin- and integrin-based junctions,
regulating their association with the actin cytoskeleton and the
strength of adhesion; however, little is known about how force
regulates homeostasis, proliferation, and morphogenesis [1, 2]. 
Cytoplasmic actomyosin controls the nuclear shuttling of transcription factors [3], and junctional actomyosin affects tight
junction (TJ) barrier function [4–8], but it is not known whether
any TJ protein can respond to tension by changing its conformation and how this may affect proteins involved in barrier function
and signaling to the nucleus. 
ZO-1 and ZO-2 (Zonula Occludens-1 and -2) [9, 10] are cytoplasmic TJ proteins, which anchor actin ﬁlaments to membrane
proteins through their C-terminal regions [11, 12].  The C-terminal
half of ZO-1 comprises actin-binding and ZU5 domains [13] and,
when exogenously expressed, does not localize at junctions but
in the cytoplasm, associated with actin ﬁlaments [11, 12, 14].  The
N-terminal half of ZO-1 comprises three PDZ domains, followed
by Src homology-3 (SH3), unique-5 (U5), guanylate kinase
(GUK), and unique-6 (U6) domains [15, 16].  The PDZ1 and
PDZ3 domains bind to the TJ membrane proteins claudins and
JAM [17, 18], and the PDZ2 domain promotes heterodimerization between ZO-1 and either ZO-2 or ZO-3, another member
of the ZO family of proteins [11, 19, 20], which is not expressed
in Eph4 epithelial cells [21].  The region of ZO-1 comprising PDZ3,
SH3, U5, and GUK domains (ZPSG-1) interacts with and recruits
to junctions the transmembrane TJ protein occludin [11, 22], the
Y-box transcription factor DbpA/ZONAB (DNA-binding protein
A/ZO-1-associated Nucleic Acid Binding protein) [23, 24], and
other ligands [13].  ZO-2 is also critical for the junctional recruitment and function of occludin [25, 26].  DbpA regulates gene
expression and cell proliferation, and its sequestration by ZO-1
and ZO-2 at junctions of conﬂuent monolayers inhibits its nuclear
activity [23, 24, 27, 28].  Occludin is implicated in the regulation
of TJ barrier function [29–31], although occludin knockout
mice have normal TJ [32].  Because ZO-1 and ZO-2 link TJ
membrane proteins to actin ﬁlaments, we hypothesized that
Current Biology 27, 3783–3795, December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd.  3783
their conformation and downstream interactions and signaling
might be modulated by force.  Here, we show that ZO-1 exists
in different force-dependent conformations and that the organization and contractility of the actomyosin cytoskeleton control
the ability of ZO-1 and ZO-2 to recruit to junctions DbpA and
occludin, to modulate gene expression, cell proliferation, barrier
function, and epithelial morphogenesis. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Structured Illumination Microscopy and Proximity
Ligation Assay Demonstrate Tension-Dependent
Changes in ZO-1 Conformation within Cells
To test whether force controls ZO-1 conformation, we expressed
ZO-1 tagged with myc and hemagglutinin (HA) at its N-terminal
and C-terminal ends (Figure 1A) in ZO-1-KO (knockout) epithelial
(Eph4) cells.  Structured illumination microscopy (SIM) and proximity ligation assay (PLA) were used to examine the global spatial
relationships between the ends of ZO-1 either in control cells or
in cells depleted of ZO-2, with or without treatment with blebbistatin, which inhibits myosin-II activity.  Exogenous ZO-1 was targeted to junctions and was detectable in the cytoplasm only in
overexpressing cells (Figures S1A and S1B).  A shift in the distribution of signal corresponding to myc and HA was detected in
cells treated with a control small interfering RNA (siRNA), regardless of the absence (Figure 1B) or the presence (Figure 1C) of
blebbistatin, and in cells depleted of ZO-2 and not treated with
blebbistatin (Figure 1D), indicating a spatial separation between
the ends of ZO-1.  In contrast, depletion of ZO-2 plus blebbistatin
treatment resulted in overlapped myc and HA signals (Figure 1E). 
Imaging of multicolor beads showed negligible chromatic shift
(Figures 1F–1F’’ and S1C), excluding the possibility that the shift
between the two ZO-1 tags reﬂects spherical aberrations.  In
junctions between two cells expressing tagged ZO-1, a central
myc-(N-terminal)-labeled region was ﬂanked by two HA-(C-terminal)-labeled regions (Figure 1G), corresponding to a mirrorlike arrangement of ZO-1 molecules on the two sides.  The
tagged cingulin, which contains a z130-nm-longdomain [33], were also imaged as separate (Figures S1D–S1F). 
Plotting the intensity of the signals as a function of the linear distance across the junction indicated a shift of z75 nm between
the peaks of green and red ﬂuorophores of ZO-1 when the
signals were separated and z1 nm when they overlapped
(Figures 1H and 1I).  When measured across the two sides of
a junction, the distance between the green ﬂuorophores was
z200 nm (Figure S1G). 
Next, we examined tension-dependent changes in ZO-1
conformation using the PLA assay (Figures 1J and 1K).  Little or
no PLA signal was generated by myc and HA in the absence
(H) Distribution of ﬂuorophores/tags signal intensities as a function of distance. 
(I) Distance between intensity peaks.  Error bars indicate SD. 
(J and K) PLA analysis on cells expressing myc-ZO-1HA, with the indicated
treatments. 
Arrows and arrowheads indicate strong or weak PLA signal, respectively.  The
scale bars represent 5 mm (B–E) and 30 mm (J and K).  Related Figure S1 shows
experimental system, control experiments, and additional measures and
quantiﬁcations.  Related Figure S7 shows schemes of ZO-1 in stretched and
folded conformations under the different experimental conditions. 
Figure 1.  Stretched and Folded and/or Disordered ZO-1 Conformations Are Detected by SIM and PLA
(A) Scheme of myc-ZO-1-HA expressed in ZO-1-KO Eph4 cells. 
(B–G) SIM images of cells expressing exogenous myc-ZO-1-HA, and treated
either with control siRNA either in the absence (B, F, and G) or in the presence (C)
of blebbistatin, or with si-ZO-2 either in the absence (D and F’) or in the presence
(E and F’’) of blebbistatin.  Red (Cy3) and green (Alexa 488) ﬂuorophores (insets/
arrows) label N- and C-terminal ends of ZO-1.  Yellow arrows indicate overlapped signal.  Experimental treatments (siRNA and blebbistatin) are indicated
on the left of images.  (F) si-control, (F’) si-ZO-2, and (F’’) si-ZO2+blebbistatin
show calibration of chromatic shift, where junctions are imaged next to
TetraSpeck Fluorescent microspheres (b, beads; merge image in bottom right
panel).  (G) The junction between two cells expressing tagged ZO-1. 
3784 Current Biology 27, 3783–3795, December 18, 2017
Figure 2.  Mechanical Stretching of Single
Full-Length ZO-1 Molecules In Vitro
(A) Scheme of experimental setup. 
(B) Force-extension curves of ZO-1 unfolding
(colored) and refolding (gray). 
(C) Zoom-in of
refolding events during forcedecrease scans (loading rate =  0. 1 pN/s) from (B). 
(D) Distribution of the ZO-1 domains unfolding
forces (loading rate = 1 pN/s). 
(E) Distribution of number of residues involved in
the individual unfolding events (N, number of unfolding events).  The inset shows the distribution of
total number of residues involved in unfolding in
individual
force-increase scans (N, number of(F) Theoretical calculation of the force-extension
curves of full-length ZO-1.  Numbers of residues
assumed to be non-structured are indicated. 
Related Figure S2 shows additional extension/
refolding curves and step size measurements. 
can be estimated based on the step
size.  This was mainly in the range of
50–200 aa (Figure 2E), consistent with
the number of residues in the structured
domains of ZO-1 (Figure S2J).  Furthermore, the estimated total number of residues (600–900 residues) involved in the
unfolding events spans 35%–50% of the
full-length ZO-1 sequence (Figure 2E,
inset), most likely within the N-terminal
half of ZO-1, which contains most
(500 aa) of the known structured domains (Figure S2J).  The rest of the molecule, most likely the C-terminal half of the
molecule, might be either in an intrinsically disordered conformation or mechanically too weak to be
determined experimentally.  Based on an assumption that the
fraction (50%–65%) of ZO-1 that does not give detectable unfolding events exists in a disordered conformation, we estimate
that a force of 2–4 pN is needed to maintain the stretched
conformation of ZO-1 (Figure 2F), with an N-to-C distance of
75 nm (Figures 1H and 1I).  This force is smaller than that
needed to unfold the structured domains (>5 pN; Figures 2B–
2D) and in the range of refolding forces (<5 pN; Figure 2C). 
Interestingly, occasionally large extension jumps involving
>500 residues were observed (Figures 2E and S2E), which
might be related to intra-molecular interactions between distal
regions of ZO-1. 
The Stretched Conformation of ZO Proteins Promotes
the Junctional Localization of DbpA and Occludin In Vivo
Next, we asked how the stretched versus folded and/or disordered conformations of ZO-1 affected the junctional accumulation of DbpA (Figure 3) and occludin (Figure S3).  In wild-type
(WT) cells in the absence of blebbistatin, DbpA was detectedthe presence/depletion of ZO-2
(Figures 3A and 3C) [24].  However, upon blebbistatin treatment,
DbpA labeling was reduced at junctions of ZO-2-depleted, but
junctions regardless of
Current Biology 27, 3783–3795, December 18, 2017 3785
of blebbistatin, regardless of the presence/depletion of ZO-2
(arrowheads, Figure 1J),
indicating that the N-terminal and
C-terminal regions of ZO-1 are >30–40 nm apart, and no headto-tail aggregation of ZO-1 occurs.  In contrast, in the presence
of blebbistatin,
the PLA signal was dramatically increased
upon depletion of ZO-2 and was detectable both at junctions
and in the cytoplasm of overexpressing cells (arrows,
Figure 1K; quantiﬁcation, Figures S1H and S1I).  This indicates
that depletion of ZO-2 and low tension promote the proximity
(<30–40 nm) between the ends of ZO-1. 
The Mechanical Stability of Full-Length ZO-1 In Vitro
To probe the mechanical stability of ZO-1, we applied force to
puriﬁed recombinant full-length single molecules using magnetic tweezers [34, 35] (Figure 2A).  When force was linearly
increased (loading rate 1 pN/s), the domains of ZO-1 were mechanically unfolded at forces of 5–60 pN, as indicated by multiple extension steps (Figures 2B, S2A, S2C, S2E, and S2G–S2I). 
The unfolded domains of ZO-1 could be refolded at forces <5
pN (loading rate  0. 1 pN/s; Figures 2C, 2D, S2B, S2D, and
S2F).  The distribution of unfolding forces shows that the majority of the domains unfold at 5–25 pN (Figure 2D).  For each unfolding event, the number of residues of the unfolding domain
Figure 3.  The Junctional Accumulation and Expression of DbpA Are Regulated by Force in a ZO-Dependent Manner
(A, B, E, and F) Immunoﬂuorescent localization of DbpA, ZO-2, PLEKHA7 (internal reference for junctions), and ZO-1 either in WT (A and B) or mixed WT+ZO-1-KO
(E and F) cells following treatment with either si-control or si-ZO-2, with the indicated drugs treatment.  The scale bar represents 5 mm.  The localization of occludin
(legend continued on next page)
3786 Current Biology 27, 3783–3795, December 18, 2017
not WT cells (Figures 3B and 3C).  DbpA levels were reduced in
cells depleted of ZO-2 and treated with blebbistatin (red box,
Figure 3D), similar to ZO-1-KO cells depleted of ZO-2 [24].  Junctional
in WT and ZO-2-KD
(knockdown) cells in the absence of blebbistatin (Figure S3A)
but was dramatically reduced by blebbistatin only in ZO-2-KD
cells (Figure S3B). 
labeling for occludin was normal
Because DbpA and occludin interact with both ZO-1 and
ZO-2 [11, 22, 24], we used ZO-1-KO cells to ask whether tension affects not only ZO-1- but also ZO-2-dependent junctional
accumulation of DbpA and occludin.  In addition, we tested
drugs that affect the organization of the actin cytoskeleton by
treating mixed cultures of WT and ZO-1-KO cells with either latrunculin A, which prevents the polymerization of actin ﬁlaments; CK-869, which inhibits Arp2/3-dependent nucleation
of branched actin ﬁlaments; SMIFH2, which inhibits the
formin-dependent nucleation of bundled actin ﬁlaments
(Figure 3E); and blebbistatin (Figure 3F).  DbpA was localized at
junctions of ZO-1-KO cells without any drug (arrows, Figure 3E,
control), consistent with the notion that ZO-2 alone, in the
absence of ZO-1, can sequester DbpA at junctions of conﬂuent
cells [24].  However, upon treatment with drugs that inhibit actin
ﬁlament polymerization, DbpA was undetectable at junctions
of ZO-1-KO, but not WT cells (arrowheads, Figure 3E).  Similarly, treatment of mixed WT/ZO-1-KO cells with blebbistatin
induced loss of junctional DbpA only in cells expressing one
ZO protein, but not in WT cells (arrowheads, Figure 3F, BL). 