
Visibility of stimulus components may be enhanced or diminished
by the presence of adjacent stimulus elements.  Such eﬀects are evident
with high-contrast lateral masks [1], metacontrast with zero stimulus
onset asynchrony [2], and crowding of peripheral targets [3].  Contextual eﬀects on perceptual capacities may reﬂect neural interactions
among representations of targets and lateral masks. 
At a neural
level, response properties of cortical neurons are
modulated by the context in which stimuli are placed [4–6].  In primates
and cats, systematic relationships exist among the orientation preference of neurons.  Such connections may contribute to a system of
enhancement and inhibition of signals based upon contextual eﬀects
from other cortical sites [7,8].  In rodents, the distribution of orientation
preference is not systematic [9,10], nor do lateral projections display
the periodic patches found in primates and cats [11].  These distinctions
in cortical organization suggest that lateral interactions among stimulus
elements may operate diﬀerently in rats than in primates and cats. 
At a perceptual level, the ability of rats to discriminate the presence
or absence of targets declined when target onset was accompanied by
ﬂankers [12].  In addition, misses as well as false alarms increased when
ﬂankers were collinear to targets, compared to ﬂankers that deviated
from collinearity.  Such eﬀects on detecting suprathreshold stimuli were
observed across a range of contrasts of both targets and ﬂankers [13]. 
For humans, contrast thresholds are elevated in the presence of
collinear, co-axial Gabor patches positioned near test stimuli (within 2
cycles), whereas thresholds decrease with adjacent elements positions
within a farther zone (approximately 3–10 cycles) [14].  Flanker eﬀects
appear to be restricted to near foveal viewing [15,16] to which attention is directed [17,16], and are not observed at suprathreshold levels
[15].  Flanker eﬀects may reﬂect a system for contour integration
mediated by short- and long-range interactions within neural populations [18]. 
The functional signiﬁcance of connection patterns in local cortical
circuits may be distinguished across species [19].  In order to explore
lateral masking on detection thresholds in rats, responses to target onset
were measured across luminance contrast for targets presented alone,
or in the presence of masks. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  Subjects
Ten Long-Evans hooded rats served as subjects, each randomly assigned to one or more stimulus conditions.  Animals were deprived of
water for 22 h before each session, and allowed water ad lib for one
hour following sessions.  Sessions occurred ﬁve days each week, and
animals were allowed water ad lib on the remaining two days.  This
⁎ Corresponding author at: Psychology Department, Brooklyn College CUNY, 2900 Bedford Avenue, Brooklyn, NY, United States. 
E-mail address: dkurylo@brooklyn. cuny. edu (D. D.  Kurylo). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 07. 046
Received 2 April 2017; Received in revised form 11 July 2017; Accepted 29 July 2017
Available online 05 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
D. D.  Kurylo Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 1–7
Fig.  1.  A.  Top view displaying geometry of test chamber.  Test stimuli (Gabor patches) appeared on the monitor, subtending a visual angle of either 5. 9° or 14. 0°.  B.  Trial events and
reaction time measurements.  Dotted lines represent variable ranges of events.  Test stimulus onset relative to initial nose-poke occurred with a randomly chosen latency, ranging from 500
to 2000 ms. 
study was conducted in accordance with the National Institutes of
Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and approved
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Brooklyn
College. 
2. 2.  Apparatus
Behavioral measurements were made in a customized operant
conditioning chamber (Fig.  1A).  The front panel of the chamber supported a metal funnel that extended 3 cm outside of the chamber.  Animals had access to the funnel through a 5 cm diameter hole, centered
2. 5 cm from the chamber ﬂoor.  Placement of the rat's head completely
within the funnel disrupted an infrared (IR) light beam connecting an
emitter/detector pair mounted at the tip of the funnel.  Rats viewed the
stimulus through holes in the funnel positioned over each eye.  Viewing
stimuli from the head-ﬁtted funnel allowed control over viewing position across trials. 
Rats had access to an enclosed drinking well positioned next to the
funnel.  A measured amount of water was delivered to the drinking well
by means of a solenoid driven valve.  Circuitry for the IR pair and solenoid were interfaced via solid-state relay switches to a computer. 
Stimulus generation, data collection, and trial events were controlled in
real-time by customized computer software [20]. 
2. 3.  Stimulus presentation
In an otherwise darkened room, stimuli were presented on a computer monitor (Trinitron CPD 4401) controlled by a graphics adaptor
(NVidia GeForce FX5200) set to 1280 × 1024 pixel resolution.  Rats
viewed stimuli at a distance of 24 cm and elevated by 10°, centered
within the binocular region of the visual ﬁeld.  Stimuli consisted of
Gabor patches on a gray background (22. 3 cd/m2).  Luminance levels
were linearized across a range of 2. 9–42. 2 cd/m2. 
2. 4.  General procedure
Using a free-operant procedure, rats initiated trials by placing their
head into a central funnel.  Following a delay, generated randomly
between 500 and 2000 ms, a Gabor patch appeared on the monitor. 
Rats were trained to remain stationary until stimulus onset, to which
they responded by withdrawing their head from the funnel (Fig.  1B). 
Following training, data collection occurred on approximately every
other session.  In order to maintain consistence performance, a session
of maintenance training occurred on alternate days. 
2. 5.  Training procedure
Following initial magazine training, rats were trained to nose-poke
the central funnel.  The next phase of training required rats to remain
stationary in the funnel for increasing lengths of time, culminating with
a 500 ms hold period.  A high-contrast Gabor patch was presented on
the monitor at the end of the required hold period.  For the next phase of
training, stimulus onset varied randomly between 500–750 ms, and rats
were required to withdraw their head from the funnel within 750 ms of
stimulus onset.  Across training sessions, stimulus onset times progressively increased to 500–2000 ms, and reaction time to stimulus onset
was progressively restricted to 50–400 ms.  Progressive increase to stimulus onset range, and progressive decrease in reaction time window,
was contingent upon rats' performance, requiring 90% correct across a
single session. 
For data collection sessions, reward was delivered on each trail,
regardless of reaction time.  In order to maintain conditioning, each
session of data collection was followed by a training session. 
2. 6.  Reaction time cluster index
Reaction time was recorded from stimulus onset to head withdrawal.  Frequency distributions of reaction times, time-locked to stimulus onset, were displayed as histograms.  High-contrast stimuli produced reaction time distributions that clustered about a mean of 237 ms
(S. D.  104 ms).  Given the unpredictable onset time of stimuli, the clustering pattern of reaction time distributions veriﬁed behavioral control
by the stimulus. 
Quantiﬁcation of reaction time clustering was based upon the incidence of responses that occurred above that found on no-stimulus
trials.  Speciﬁcally, the distribution of response frequency (histogramD. D.  Kurylo Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 1–7
Fig.  2.  Reaction Time Cluster Index.  A.  Reaction time frequency distribution was ﬁrst compiled for trials with no stimuli.  The upper boundary of the no-stimulus (nominal) distribution
was set to 2 S. D.  above the mean.  B.  For each contrast level, response frequencies above the nominal boundary served as the cluster index. 
bin height) across reaction time was ﬁrst determined for no-stimulus
trials (Fig.  2A).  The upper boundary of the nominal distribution was set
to 2 S. D.  above the distribution mean.  Reaction time distributions were
then measured for each stimulus condition (Fig.  2B). 