Article
Vagus Motor Neuron Topographic Map Determined
by Parallel Mechanisms of hox5 Expression and Time
of Axon Initiation
Highlights
d Time of axon formation is differentially regulated independent
of neuron birthdateGabrielle R.  Barsh, Adam J.  Isabella,
Cecilia B.  Moens
d hox5 genes are expressed in posterior, but not anterior,
vagus motor neurons
Correspondence
cmoens@fredhutch. org
d hox5 directs vagus topographic map formation independent
of time of axon outgrowth
d Time of axon outgrowth directs vagus topographic map
formation independent of hox5
In Brief
The development of topographic maps
classically relies upon spatial patterning
mechanisms.  Barsh Name show that in
zebraﬁsh vagus motor neurons, map
formation is determined by a hox5dependent spatial mechanism that acts in
parallel with a novel temporal mechanism
dependent upon the time of axon
outgrowth. 
Barsh Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3812–3825
December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 022
Current BiologyVagus Motor Neuron Topographic Map
Determined by Parallel Mechanisms
of hox5 Expression and Time of Axon Initiation
Gabrielle R.  Barsh,1,2,3 Adam J.  Isabella,1 and Cecilia B.  Moens1,2,4,*
1Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA
2Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
3Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
4Lead Contact
*Correspondence: cmoens@fredhutch. org
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 022Many networks throughout the nervous system are
organized into topographic maps, where the positions
of neuron cell bodies in the projecting ﬁeld correspond
with the positions of their axons in the target ﬁeld.  Previous studies of topographic map development show
evidence for spatial patterning mechanisms, in which
molecular determinants expressed across the projecting and target ﬁelds are matched directly in a point-topoint mapping process.  Here, we describe a novel
temporal mechanism of topographic map formation
that depends on spatially regulated differences in the
timing of axon outgrowth and functions in parallel
with spatial point-to-point mapping mechanisms.  We
focus on the vagus motor neurons, which are topographically arranged in both mammals and ﬁsh.  We
show that cell position along the anterior-posterior
axis of hindbrain rhombomere 8 determines expression of hox5 genes, which are expressed in posterior,
but not anterior, vagus motor neurons.  Using live imaging and transplantation in zebraﬁsh embryos, we
additionally reveal that axon initiation is delayed in
posterior vagus motor neurons independent of neuron
birth time.  We show that hox5 expression directs
topographic mapping without affecting time of axon
outgrowth and that time of axon outgrowth directs
topographic mapping without affecting hox5 expression.  The vagus motor neuron topographic map is
therefore determined by two mechanisms that act in
parallel: a hox5-dependent spatial mechanism akin
to classic mechanisms of topographic map formation
and a novel axon outgrowth-dependent temporal
mechanism in which time of axon formation is spatially
regulated to direct axon targeting. 
INTRODUCTION
Topographic maps are a common organizational motif in neurobiology and are crucial for the ability of animals to accurately
perceive and respond to their external environment.  These
maps are characterized by an arrangement of neurons in which
neighbor-neighbor relationships are preserved between cell
bodies and axon targets, creating representations of the outside
world inside the brain [1].  The best-studied topographic maps
form through a spatial patterning process, where precise patterns of gene expression in neurons and their target areas direct
axons to the proper location in a point-to-point matching system
[2, 3].  For example, in the retinotopic map, gradients of EphA receptor expression in the retina and EphrinA ligand expression in
the tectum are matched such that high and low EphA-expressing
neurons innervate opposite regions of the tectum while neighbor
neurons expressing similar EphA levels innervate the same
region [4–9].  Similarly, in the spinal musculotopic map, dorsal
and ventral limb-innervating neurons occupy spatially distinct locations and reach their respective targets due to the presence of
repulsive ligands expressed by the inappropriate targets [10–14]. 
Thus, spatial patterning mechanisms underlie topographic map
development in both sensory and motor systems. 
In addition to classic spatial patterning, previous studies have
also proposed a temporal mechanism of topographic map
development.  In the Drosophila photoreceptor map, sequential
expression of a temporal identity transcription factor during neurogenesis directs targeting to different layers of the medulla [15]. 
Additionally, in the mouse olfactory topographic map, cell position correlates with birth order and therefore with time of axonin the target region [16, 17].  However, though these
studies demonstrate correlations between temporal patterning
and topographic connectivity, timing-based mechanisms for
topographic map formation have been difﬁcult to explicitly test,
as they require live imaging and the ability to manipulate the temporal environment. 
Here, to dissect the relative contributions of both spatial and
temporal mechanisms of topographic map development, we
focus on vagus motor neurons (motor neurons of cranial
nerve X, or mX neurons) in the zebraﬁsh embryo as a model of
topographic map development.  In all vertebrates, mX neurons
are located in the most posterior segment of the hindbrain, rhombomere 8 (r8) [18].  In humans, mX neurons innervate pharyngealarch-derived muscles important for speech and swallowing. 
In ﬁsh, mX neurons innervate homologous muscles to move
the pharynx, gills, and pharyngeal
In both ﬁsh and
humans, the vagus also supplies preganglionic parasympathetic3812 Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
(legend on next page)
Current Biology 27, 3812–3825, December 18, 2017 3813
innervation of visceral targets [19, 20].  Previous studies in ﬁsh
and mammals have shown that mX neurons in the adult animal
are arranged topographically, with anterior neurons innervating
more anterior pharyngeal arches and posterior neurons innervating posterior pharyngeal arches and visceral[21, 22]. 