
The incidence of stress-related disorders, such as depression, is approximately twice as high in women as in men [1,2].  In addition, the
symptoms and pharmacological treatments of these conditions diﬀer in
both sexes [3].  This disparity could be due to physiological and behavioral sexual diﬀerences in response to the same stressor or diﬀerences
in the stimuli perceived as stressful [4–6].  Despite these ﬁndings, the
contribution of these diﬀerences to the development of stress-related
disorders in women is poorly understood.  This lack of knowledge may
be due to bias toward males in research in this ﬁeld, perhaps because of
the need for a homogeneous sample devoid of hormonal ﬂuctuations
[7] or the lack of a social stress model appropriate for females. 
Chronic social stress is considered the most common etiological
factor in the precipitation of depressive disorders in humans [8].  In
preclinical studies, a commonly used animal model of social stress is
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: l. garmendia@ehu. eus (L.  Garmendia). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 002
Received 8 May 2017; Received in revised form 10 July 2017; Accepted 1 August 2017
Available online 05 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
social defeat in male rodents.  This model is based on the resident-intruder paradigm, where subjects interact aggressively to establish
dominance over the territory [9].  This model has been very useful in
establishing the mechanisms underlying depressive symptoms [10,11]
but is not considered adequate to induce chronic social stress in females
because females do not exhibit territorial aggression [12,13].  Given the
importance of social support in coping with stress in females [6], the
disruption of the social network may be a more valid social stressor. 
Thus, the chronic social instability stress model used in rats [12] and
mice [14] seems to be a better suited stress model given the social
nature of females.  This model consists of interrupting the animals’ social network, alternating periods of
isolation and crowding with
membership rotation.  Although few studies have used this model and
the protocols used in these studies diﬀer, the results have shown
changes in the HPA axis in both rats and mice.  These studies also describe anxiety and depressive-like behavioral changes in conventional
A.  Labaka Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 8–18
behavioral tests, but data are still inconclusive [14–17].  Moreover, the
eﬀects of CSI on the immune and monoaminergic systems, which play
an essential role in the pathology of depression [18,19], are unknown. 
A large body of evidence supports the association between increases
in the production of inﬂammatory cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)1β, IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and the pathogenesis
of aﬀective disorders [20,21].  These data have been supported by animal models in which psychosocial stress, in addition to resulting in
inﬂammatory immune activation, produces behavioral changes associated with depression.  An increase in inﬂammatory cytokine levels has
also been observed in brain structures involved in aﬀective disorders,
such as the prefrontal cortex, amygdale and hippocampus [22,23]. 
Although most research has focused on the increase of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, several studies indicate that an imbalance between pro- and anti-inﬂammatory cytokines can produce lasting
changes in brain function and attribute a protective role to anti-inﬂammatory cytokines, such as IL −10, thereby highlighting their role
in depressive behavior [24,25]. 
Many studies have focused on the impact of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines on monoaminergic function.  Speciﬁcally,
the enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), activated by pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, metabolizes TRYP into KYN, leading to serotonin reduction,
which has been implicated in depression [26].  In addition, the activation of kynurenine metabolic pathways may lead to the formation of
neurotoxic products, including 3-HK, a precursor of the quinolinic acid
[27] which increase has been associated with severe depression [28]. 
Pro-inﬂammatory cytokines may also aﬀect monoaminergic transmission by increasing the function of their reuptake pumps and/or decreasing the availability of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), a key enzyme cofactor in the synthesis of all monoamines [29]. 
In the context of this work, which analyzes the eﬀects of social stress
on females, in addition to the well-documented inﬂuence of the HPA
axis in the regulation of immune function [30], the role of female sex
steroids must be also considered.  The modulation of immune responses
by estrogen is complex because it may increase or decrease the production of inﬂammatory cytokines depending on the context, its concentration or type of receptor to which it binds [31].  Estrogens, similar
to other sex steroids, alter the functioning of immune cells by binding to
speciﬁc receptors that are expressed in the immune system.  In the brain,
ERα and ERβ have been identiﬁed in glial cells [32], and some studies
suggest that estrogen exhibits anti-inﬂammatory properties by binding
to ERβ [33].  In this sense, it has been observed that estrogens modulate
inﬂammation in the hippocampus and anxiety and depressive-like behaviors via ERβ [34]. 
In this work, we studied in female mice the eﬀect of CSI on behavior
and diﬀerent systems associated to stress related aﬀective disorders.  For
this purpose, we assessed behavior in the FST and sucrose preference
test (SPT), as well as barbering behavior, since this behavior was observed in stressed mice throughout the experiment.  We also measured
hippocampal changes in the expression of the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α and the anti-inﬂammatory cytokine IL-10
as well as monoaminergic activity.  Taking into account the relationship
between monoaminergic and immune activity, the expression of IDO
and the levels of TRYP, KYN and 3-HK in the same brain structure were
measured.  The hippocampus was chosen because, in addition to interacting with other structures related to depression, such as the prefrontal
cortex, amygdala and striatum, it is also a structure that is particularly
sensitive to the eﬀects of stress and sex hormones [35].  Moreover, it
plays an important role in the stress-induced inﬂammatory response
[36].  Finally, we assessed the eﬀect of this chronic stress model on the
HPA and HPG systems by measuring the levels of plasma corticosterone
and estradiol and their receptors in the brain.  In addition, estrous cycle
was also studied. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Animals
Sixty-two 8-week-old female CD1 mice (Janvier Labs, France) were
housed in groups of three for 7 days in transparent plastic cages measuring 24. 5 × 24. 5 × 15 cm.  Food and water were available ad libitum. 
The holding room was maintained at a constant temperature of 20 °C
with a reversed 12-h light/dark cycle (white lights on from 20:00 to
08:00 h), to enable mouse manipulation during the animal’s active
phase (dark).  All experimental procedures were conducted under dim
red light conditions in a room adjacent to the holding facility.  The
European regulations for the care and treatment of experimental animals were followed, and the procedures were controlled and approved
by the Diputación Foral de Gipuzkoa, Spain, in compliance with the
European Directive (2010/63/EU) on the protection of animals used for
scientiﬁc purposes (22 September 2010).  The procedures were approved by the Ethical Committee for animal welfare of the Basque
Country University (CEBA). 
2. 2.  Experimental procedure
The experiment began after a 7-day adaptation period.  A control
group (n = 30) and a group of socially stressed mice (n = 32) were
established.  Chronic social instability stress was applied to the stress
group during a 28-day period.  The control mice remained in same
conditions as the habituation time.  Blood was collected via submandibular vein puncture on days 1 and 25 for all subjects (N = 62) to
measure plasma corticosterone levels.  Body weight was measured at the
beginning and at the end of stress period. 