
Attention constitutes a constellation of cognitive processes responsible for directing awareness to relevant stimuli and ﬁltering out
irrelevant information.  Attentional impairments are known to constitute performance reductions in other cognitive domains including
memory and executive functions in patients suﬀering from Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) [1,2].  The basal forebrain (BF) cholinergic system, consisting of cortically-projecting neurons in the nucleus basalis magnocellularis (nBM) and substantia innominata (SI) region, mediates essential aspects of attentional
information processing [3,4], and
cholinergic dysregulation is a common feature of the mild cognitive
impairment (MCI) and AD pathology [5–8].  Thus, it is suggested that
disruption in cholinergic signaling may underlie cognitive decline in
MCI/AD.  Aging is a well-known risk factor for AD.  Although a gradual
weakening of the cholinergic system and subtle decrements in attentional capacities have been reported in aging [9–13], the mechanisms
responsible for the accelerated decline in cholinergic function in
sporadic AD are not fully understood. 
BF cholinergic neurons depend upon nerve growth factor (NGF) for
survival, growth, and maturation [14–16].  Substantial evidence indicates that the cholinotrophic eﬀects of NGF are mediated by its
binding to the high-aﬃnity tropomyosin kinase A (trkA) receptors
[17–19].  Moreover, the loss of trkA receptors has been observed in the
postmortem brains of AD subjects [20–22].  Together, these studies
support the notion that perhaps deﬁcient trkA signaling in cholinergic
neurons may underlie their exceptional vulnerability and lead to cognitive decline in AD [23,24].  However, neurotrophic modulation of the
cholinergic system and cognitive capacities has not been thoroughly
investigated in the context of aging, which is known to potentially increase the risk of developing AD [25]. 
We previously found signiﬁcant attentional impairments and disrupted cholinergic signaling in aged but not adult trkA-suppressed rats
[26].  In another follow-up study, we observed that cholinergic-attentional capacities were partially rescued by blocking proNGF, a precursor of NGF, in trkA-suppressed aged rats [27].  ProNGF is known to
⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: vinay. parikh@temple. edu (V.  Parikh). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 017
Received 13 June 2017; Received in revised form 20 July 2017; Accepted 7 August 2017
Available online 10 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
B.  Yegla, V.  Parikh
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 111–121
induce apoptotic signaling via its interaction with high-aﬃnity p75
receptors and the sortilin complex [28], and numerous studies indicated that the expression of this pro-neurotrophin is elevated in aging
and AD [29–32].  Thus, age-related imbalance between proNGF/NGF
and trkA/p75 signaling may account for increased vulnerability of the
cholinergic system and associated cognitive impairments in AD. 
Moreover, suppression of trkA signaling per se in young may not impose
any inimical eﬀects on the BF cholinergic system.  This view is supported by a previous study showing that forebrain-speciﬁc targeted
deletion of NGF or trkA receptors exerted detrimental eﬀects on BF
cholinergic neurons during postnatal development but did not impact
learning and memory performance when assessed in either young adult
or intermediate-aged mice [33]. 
During the progression of sporadic AD, cortical areas are aﬀected in
a stereotypic sequence that recapitulates ontogenetic brain development [34].  Although the available evidence supports the idea that
perhaps reduced trophic support during ontogenetic development and
maturation of the cortical cholinergic input system may escalate into
MCI and AD [35,36], the premise that developmental abrogation of BF
trkA signaling would accelerate age-related decline in the cholinergic
system and cognitive capacities has never been tested.  Here we conducted a longitudinal study to evaluate the life-long impact of developmental trkA suppression on attentional functions.  We utilized an
adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector that expresses trkA-shRNA to selectively knockdown trkA receptors in the BF during the postnatal
phase in rats when cholinergic projections make contact with cortical
target regions.  The animals were trained in an operant sustained attention task (SAT), and performance was assessed throughout adulthood until old age, at which point cholinergic signaling and morphology were also evaluated.  Developmental trkA suppression neither
accelerated the emergence, nor exacerbated the presence, of age-related
attentional impairments.  Moreover, postnatal trkA disruption aﬀected
only certain aspects of cholinergic transmission in aged rats.  Together,
our ﬁndings indicate that lifelong cognitive engagement may have
compensated for the detrimental eﬀects of developmental trkA knockdown on age-related decline in attention processes and the cholinergic
transmission that these cognitive capacities depend on. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Subjects
Male Wistar rat pups [post-natal day (PND) 14] were purchased
from Charles River Laboratories (Malvern, PA, USA) along with the
nursing dams (8 pups/dam).  Animals were maintained in a temperature- and humidity-controlled room with a 12:12 light-dark cycle
starting at 7AM at Temple University.  At PND 18–21, rat pups underwent stereotaxic intracranial infusions of AAV vectors (see procedure
below).  Pups were returned to cages and maintained with the dams
until weaning at PND 22 following which the animals were grouphoused (2 per cage) with food and water ad libitum until the commencement of further experiments.  All experimental procedures were
conducted in accordance with the National Institute of Health guidelines and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee and the Institutional Biosafety Committee at Temple
University. 
2. 2.  Stereotaxic surgeries and experimental design
Rat pups (PND 18–21) were prepared for stereotaxic surgeries to
produce knockdown of BF trkA receptors using an AAV vector-based
RNA interference (RNAi) approach.  This developmental period was
selected because BF cholinergic neurons make contact with NGF-producing target neurons throughout the cortical mantle during postnatal
weeks 3–5, and trkA signaling is critical in facilitating proper cortical
cholinergic innervation [37,18,38,39].  All surgeries were performed
under aseptic conditions.  Pups were anesthetized with isoﬂurane (4–5%
for induction and 1–2% maintenance dose) using an anesthesia machine (Surgivet, Dublin, OH, USA) and mounted on a stereotaxic frame
(Model 962; David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA, USA).  The head of
the pups was positioned into the head frame using neonatal rat ear bars
containing Zygoma ear cups (David Kopf).  An isothermal deltaphase
pad (Braintree Scientiﬁc, Braintree, MA, USA) was used to consistently
maintain animals’ body temperature at 37 °C throughout the surgical
procedure.  A recombinant AAV vector previously designed and validated in our laboratory for in vivo suppression of trkA receptors (AAVtrkA) was used in the present study [26,40].  This vector utilizes a
synthetic inhibitory B-cell receptor inducible gene BIC-derived RNA
(SIBR) expression plasmid to guide the expression of both the small
hairpin RNA (shRNA) against the trkA gene and the reporter gene
(green ﬂuorescent protein; GFP).  Another AAV vector expressing
shRNA targeting the gene for ﬁreﬂy luciferase (AAV-luc) served as
control for non-speciﬁc virus eﬀects.  Prior to the surgeries, AAV vectors
were desalted using the Hyclone buﬀer (University of Iowa Vector
Core).  Rat pups received bilateral infusions of either AAV-trkA or AAVluc (1. 5 μL/hemisphere; titer: 0. 7-2. 8 × 1013 vg/mL) into the BF, speciﬁcally targeting the nBM/SI region that contain cholinergic neurons
(from Bregma; A/P: −1. 0; M/L: ± 2. 3; D/V: −6. 0).  All injections
were made using a 10 μL Hamilton syringe (28 gauge) at a rate of 1 μL/
min.  After cessation of the injection, the needle was left in place for an
additional 4 min to allow complete diﬀusion of virus particles and then
slowly withdrawn.  The incision site was stapled and triple antibiotic
ointment was applied to the area surrounding the staples.  Rat pups
were given injections of an antibiotic (Baytril, 0. 01 mg/kg, s. c. ) and an
analgesic (buprenorphine, 0. 01 mg/kg, s. c. ) prior to returning to the
nursing dam. 
A schematic illustration of the experimental design is shown in
Fig.  1.  To assess the impact of developmental trkA knockdown on
Fig 1.  Schematic illustration of the experimental design.  At PND 18–21, rat pups underwent stereotaxic surgeries for the bilateral infusion of the AAV vector expressing the shRNA against
either trkA (AAV-trkA) or the control gene luciferase (AAV-luc) into the BF.  To evaluate the impact of developmental trkA suppression on attentional capacity throughout aging, rats
initiated behavioral training in operant SAT at 6 months and were maintained on the task until 24 months old.  Age-related changes in attentional function were assessed speciﬁcally from
12 to 24 months old.  After completion of the behavioral testing, electrochemical recordings of cortical cholinergic transmission were conducted in anesthetized rats following which the
brain tissues were processed for immunohistochemistry. B.  Yegla, V.  Parikh
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 111–121
attentional capacities in aging rats, the animals (N = 8/vector manipulation) were single-housed at 6 months of age and the operant behavioral training was initiated (see task details below).  Rats used for behavioral studies were handled extensively prior to training and were
partially water-deprived by restricting access to a 10-min period in the
home cage following each behavioral session.  On non-training days,
water access was increased to a 30-min period.  Food was available adlibitum throughout the duration of behavioral testing.  Animals remained
on task until 24 months old and the eﬀects of vector manipulation and
age on behavioral performance were assessed on a monthly basis
starting from month 12 until the completion of the study.  At 24 months,
animals underwent amperometric recording sessions to evaluate theimmunohistochemical examination of trkA and choline acetyltransferase
(ChAT, a marker of cholinergic neurons) expression.  A subset of animals
(N = 4-5/vector manipulation) was perfused at 6 weeks of age to assess
the eﬃciency of the viral vector for developmental trkA suppression
(see immunohistochemistry procedure below). 
cholinergic
signalingcortical
followed2. 3.  Operant training and testing procedures
Behavioral training and testing was conducted in modular operant
conditioning chambers made of clear polycarbonate and mounted on a
white polypropylene base (Med Associates Inc. , St.  Albans, VT, USA). 
Each chamber contained a front stainless steel panel with three lights
(2. 8 W each), two retractable levers, and a liquid receptacle attached to
a water dispenser in the center of the panel.  The back panel of each
chamber contained a house light and the ﬂoor was composed of a
stainless steel grid bar.  Operant chambers were enclosed in sound-attenuating cubicles equipped with fans to dampen surrounding noise
(Fig.  2A).  All events including signal delivery, lever presentations, and
reward delivery were transmitted using programs written in Medstate
notation via SmrtCtrl™ interface on a Dell Optiplex 960 computer. 
Rats were trained in an operant SAT that encapsulates all elements
of signal detection theory to assess attentional capacities [41,10,42]. 
Animals were initially autoshaped on a FR-1 schedule of reinforcement
for water reward (0. 02 mL water) to attain the lever press response. 
During this phase, if the animals pressed the same lever > 5 times in
succession, the lever ceased to be reinforced until the discrepancy between the two levers was reduced.  This step was adopted to deter the
development of a side bias.  Once the rats made 120 lever presses within
a single autoshaping session, they progressed to the next phase of
training to learn paradigm contingencies.  At this stage, the animals
were trained to distinguish between signal (illumination of the central
panel light for 1 s) and non-signal (no illumination) trials.  Rats were
pseudo-randomly designated to a lever side under signal trial conditions and had to respond on the opposite lever for non-signal trials.  For
example, if a rat was designated to the left lever, on a signal trial, a left
lever press was rewarded (i. e. , hit) but not a right lever press (i. e. ,
miss).  In contrast, a right lever press on a non-signal trial was rewarded
(i. e. , correct rejection) but left lever press (i. e. , false alarm) was not
rewarded (see Fig.  2B for task illustration).  Levers were presented 2 s
after a 1s-long signal illumination.  If rats did not lever press within 4 s
the levers were retracted, and it was deemed an omission.  The assignment of lever (left or right) for each trial type was counterbalanced
across animals within a group.  The inter-trial
interval (ITI) was
12 ± 3s.  During this training phase, an incorrect response elicited
correction trials in which the same trial type was repeated up to 4 sequential times to assist with learning the task contingencies.  If the incorrect behavior persisted a forced trial was provided, in which only the
correct lever was presented.  Rats progressed to the ﬁnal training stage
when they performed 160 trials with ≥70% on hits and correct rejections and ≤20% omissions for three consecutive days. 
The ﬁnal stage of SAT consisted of a pseudo-randomized sequence
of 81 signal (27 per signal duration) and 81 non-signal trials (total 162
trials).  Each session was divided into three blocks of 54 trials (27 signal
trials and 27 non-signal trials).  Signals occurred unpredictably at three
durations (500, 50, and 25 ms; Fig.  2B), with 9 trials/signal duration in
each block.  Moreover, the ITI was reduced to 9 ± 3s, and the house
light remained illuminated throughout the session.  These task conditions are known to constrain rats’ behavior for continuous monitoring
of the central panel and tax attentional capacity [41].  Rats were characterized as acquiring the task once they achieved ≥70% on 500 ms
signal duration trials, ≥70% on correct rejections, and ≤10% omissions for three consecutive training sessions.  To further assess the impact of aging and developmental trkA knockdown on top-down attentional capacity, rats were tested in a distractor version of SAT (dSAT) at
12 and 24 months of age, respectively.  dSAT involved the presentation
of a visual distractor (ﬂashing house light at 0. 5 Hz) in the second block
of the session. 
Behavioral performance for each session was evaluated by calculating the proportion of hits (h = hits/hits + misses) for each signal
length and the proportion of false alarms (fa = false alarms/false
alarms + correct rejections).  A composite measure of attention was
calculated as a performance score (SAT/dSAT) using the formula, (hfa)/[2(h + fa)-(h + fa)2], as described earlier [43].  SAT/dSAT scores
Fig.  2.  Behavioral experiments in rats.  A) Operant conditioning chambers enclosed in sound-attenuating cubicles used for behavioral training and testing.  B) A schematic representation
of the sustained attention task (SAT).  Rats discriminated between signal (illumination of the central panel light) and non-signal (no illumination) trials by exhibiting an appropriate lever
press response (either left or right).  Animals were pseudo-randomly designated to a lever side for each trial condition.  For a left lever assignment on a signal trial, a left lever press was
scored as a hit (h) and rewarded but a right lever press was scored as a miss (m) and was not rewarded.  In contrast, a right lever press on a non-signal trial was scored as a correct rejection
(cr) and rewarded but not a left lever press which was considered a false alarm (fa).  The assignment of lever (left or right) for each trial type was counterbalanced across animals within a
group.  At the ﬁnal stage of SAT training, each session consisted of a pseudo-randomized sequence of 81 signal and 81 non-signal trials with an inter-trial interval of 9 ± 3s.  Signals
occurred unpredictably at three durations (500, 50, and 25 ms) and the house light remained illuminated throughout the session. B.  Yegla, V.  Parikh
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 111–121
ranged from −1 to +1; a score of +1 indicated correct responses on all
signal and non-signal trials, 0 indicated inability to discern signal and
non-signal trials, and −1 indicated all misses and false alarms in a
session.  Latency for the lever press response under each performance
condition and percentage omissions were also calculated for each session.  Performance measures on three consecutive sessions were averaged for each rat at a given age and used for statistical analysis. 
2. 4.  In vivo amperometric recordings
Following the completion of behavioral studies at 24 months of age,
rats were prepared for amperometric recordings of cholinergic transmission using enzyme-selective microelectrodes as described earlier
[26,44,45].  Brieﬂy, microelectrode arrays (Quanteon, Nicholasville,
KY, USA) consisting of four rectangular platinum recording sites arranged side by side in pairs were coated with choline oxidase (SigmaAldrich, St.  Louis, MO, USA).  The enzyme was immobilized to the
bottom pair of recording sites while the upper pair was coated with
bovine serum albumin and served as sentinel channels.  The electrode
channels were electroplated with m-PD (m-phenylenediamine) to enhance the selectivity of choline against electroactive analytes such as
ascorbic acid (AA), dopamine (DA) and uric acid.  Choline sensitivity
and selectivity was tested for all electrodes by conducting an in vitro
calibration.  Electrodes that exhibited the following calibration criterion
were subsequently used for in vivo recordings: choline sensitivity > 3
pA/μM, limit of detection < 500 nM; selectivity ratio for choline:AA > 50, linear response for choline concentration R2 > 0. 98, and DA
response < 3pA. 
For in vivo recordings, rats were anesthetized with urethane (1. 21. 5 g/kg, i. p. ) and placed in a stereotaxic frame.  Enzyme-coated microelectrodes were lowered into the right medial prefrontal cortex
(PFC; A/P: +3. 0 mm, M/L: −0. 7 mm, D/V: −2. 7-3. 0 mm) of rats using
a microdrive (MO-10, Narishige International, East Meadow, NY, USA). 
Ag/AgCl reference electrodes were implanted into the rostral cortical
region of the contralateral hemisphere.  Amperometric recordings were
conducted at 2 Hz by applying a ﬁxed potential of +0. 7 V, and data
were digitized using a FAST-16 potentiostat (Quanteon).  Background
currents were stabilized for 60 min following which drugs were locally
applied into the PFC using a glass capillary that was attached to the
tip diameter of 15–20 μm. 
electrode and pulled to an internal
Depolarization-evoked acetylcholine (ACh) release that mimics the
phasic characteristics of cholinergic transmission on a temporal time
scale (second-based) was measured by applying brief pulses of potassium (KCl, 70 mM; 200 nL) as reported earlier [45].  To determine
the consequences of trkA disruption on tonic changes in cortical ACh
release, we applied a high concentration of nicotine (100 μM; 200 nL)
that is known to produce long-lasting (minute-based) changes in cholinergic transmission presumably via low-aﬃnity α7 nicotinic receptor
activation [46,44].  Pulses of drug solutions were applied at 2–10 psi
every 2 min through the capillaries via PTFE tubing connected to a
picospritzer (ALA Scientiﬁc Instruments, Farmingdale, NY, USA).  Choline signals were analyzed with respect to peak signal amplitudes and
clearance (T50; time for a signal to be reduced by 50% of peak amplitude).  Self-referencing was adopted to eliminate any artifacts on enzyme-coated channels due to background noise levels or drug application by subtracting currents from sentinel channels.  Amperometric
recording data for KCl- and nicotine-elicited signals were binned at
0. 5 s and 2. 5 s, respectively.  Nicotine-evoked signals were box-car ﬁltered by a moving average of 2–5 data points.  All data were expressed
as the average of three signals per manipulation per animal. 
2. 5.  Immunohistochemistry and image analysis
Rats were transcardially perfused using 100 mL of ice-cold 0. 1 M
phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS) followed by 200 mL of 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA; pH 7. 4-7. 6).  The brains were removed, post-ﬁxed
overnight in PFA, and then transferred to 30% sucrose (in 0. 1 M PBS)
for 72 h.  Coronal sections (50 μm thick) were obtained from the rostralcaudal axis of the PFC (range: +3. 5 mm to +2. 5 mm A/P) and BF
(range: −1. 0 mm to −1. 9 mm A/P) using a freezing microtome
(SM2000R, Leica, Wetzlar, Germany).  Slices were stored in cryoprotectant solution (15% glucose, 30% ethylene glycol, and 0. 04% sodium
azide in 0. 05 M PBS) at −20 °C until further processing. 
Vector targeting of BF cholinergic neurons and eﬃciency of trkA
knockdown was assessed using GFP/ChAT double immunostaining and
trkA immunohistochemistry as described previously [26,40].  Brieﬂy,
serial sections from the BF regions were randomly selected and rinsed
in 0. 5 M tris-buﬀered saline (TBS), blocked with 10% donkey serum
and incubated overnight in goat anti-ChAT (1:200; EMD Millipore,
Billerica, MA, USA).  Sections were rinsed in TBS containing 1% triton
X100 (TBST; 3 × 5 min), tagged with rhodamine-conjugated donkey
anti-goat antibody (1:250; Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories; West
Grove, PA, USA), mounted onto gelatin-coated slides, coverslipped with
Prolong Gold Anti-fade with DAPI mounting media (Life Technologies,
Grand Island, NY, USA), and visualized for colocalization of GFP protein in ChAT-positive neurons.  Parallel sections assessed for trkA expression levels were blocked for endogenous peroxidase using 0. 3%
H2O2.  To eliminate non-speciﬁc binding of the primary antibody, slices
were blocked in 10% goat serum.  Sections were incubated with rabbit
anti-trkA antibody (1:1000; EMD Millipore) overnight.  Following rinsing with TBST (3 × 5 min), sections were incubated with biotinylated
goat anti-rabbit IgG (pre-diluted; EMD Millipore) for 2 h.  The staining
was developed by incubating the sections in streptavidin-HRP followed
by 3-3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and ammonium nickel sulfate.  Stained
sections were mounted on gelatin-coated slides, air dried, dehydrated,
and coverslipped with DPX.  To assess the morphology of cholinergic
neurons and terminal distribution, serial sections from the BF (nBM/SI
region) and medial PFC were stained for ChAT as described earlier
[26,40].  Free-ﬂoating sections were incubated with goat anti-ChAT
antibody (1:100; EMD Millipore) and peroxidase staining was developed using HRP-conjugated donkey anti-goat (1:1000 for cell bodies
and 1:200 for terminals) and DAB. 
All sections were analyzed using a Leica ﬂuorescent microscope
equipped with DFC 425C digital camera and Leica Application Suite 3
software (Leica Microsystems Inc. , Buﬀalo Grove, IL, USA).  Fluorescent
images were captured at 200 x using green and red ﬁlters to visualize
the expression of GFP and ChAT in both hemispheres.  Viral vector colocalization with BF cholinergic neurons was calculated as the percentage of ChAT-positive neurons co-expressing GFP out of 100 cholinergic neurons (50/hemisphere).  For the analysis of BF trkA expression,
images were acquired in the light microscope mode and processed for
quantitative image analysis using NIH ImageJ analysis software. 
Digitized images (400 x magniﬁcation) were processed in binary mode
and threshold levels were adjusted to enhance the visibility of cell
bodies.  The density of trkA receptors was expressed as percentage of
trkA-positive pixels in the analyzed area (325 μm × 245 μm) from both
hemispheres.  Morphometric analysis of cholinergic neurons involved
the measurement of cell size as described previously [26,40].  Mean
cross-sectional area of ChAT-positive neurons was calculated from
randomly selected sampling areas (400 x magniﬁcation) within the
nBM/SI region from both hemispheres.  Cell borders were outlined
manually and the area (in pixel2 units) was calculated by NIH ImageJ
based on the user-deﬁned border.  Cross-sectional area was converted
from pixels2 to μm2 based on image magniﬁcation (scaling factor: 12. 09
pixels/μm).  TrkA-densities and mean cross-sectional ChAT areas were
averaged from both hemispheres and data are expressed as analyses
from three sections per animal.  PFC ChAT-immunoreactive ﬁber density was analyzed using a grid counting procedure [26,42,40] from the
right prelimbic region (cortical layers III/V), which was also used to
measure ACh release following terminal depolarization (see amperometric recordings above).  Images were captured at 400 x magniﬁcation
and threshold levels were uniformly adjusted across all sections toB.  Yegla, V.  Parikh
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 111–121
maximize visualization of ChAT-positive ﬁbers in Adobe Photoshop CS4
(Adobe Systems Inc. , San Jose, CV).  Cholinergic ﬁbers were manually
traced and counted using a 50 × 50 μm grid for a total area of
40,000 μm2.  Average ﬁber counts were based on three sections per
region per animal. 
2. 6.  Statistics
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS/PC+ version 24. 0
(IBM-SPSS, Armonk, NY, USA).  Mixed-design analysis of variance
(ANOVA) tests were applied to analyze behavioral data with age, signal
duration, and/or block as within-subject factors, and trkA manipulation
as a between-subject factor.  When appropriate, a one-way ANOVA,
followed by Bonferroni post hoc test for multiple comparisons, was
conducted
interaction. 
Immunohistochemical and amperometric analyses were conducted
using a one-way ANOVA to determine the impact of developmental
trkA manipulation on trkA density, age, cholinergic morphology and
functionality.  A cut-oﬀ p value of 0. 05 was considered statistically
signiﬁcant. 
determinetoof
3.  Results
3. 1.  Long-term suppression of BF trkA receptors following postnatal infusion
of AAV vector
We ﬁrst assessed the eﬃcacy of the recombinant AAV vector to
suppress trkA receptors in BF neurons, which was injected during the
developmental phase when cholinergic neurons make connections with
NGF-producing cortical regions and NGF-trkA signaling ﬁne tunes this
projection system.  Rat pups were infused with the viral vector expressing trkA shRNA or luc shRNA into the BF during postnatal week 3 and
brain sections were visualized at 6 weeks old.  As shown in Fig.  3(A, B),
the vector spread, exempliﬁed by the expression of the reporter protein
GFP, into the nBM/SI region and its colocalization with ChAT-positive
neurons indicate that our strategy targeted cholinergic neurons, > 80%
of which express trkA receptors in this region in rats [47].  BF trkA receptor expression observed at 6 weeks of age signiﬁcantly declined in
AAV-trkA-infused rat pups as compared to pups infused with the control
vector (F(1,9) = 2. 86, p < 0. 03; Fig.  3D, E).  These observations are in
line with our previous work that utilized the AAV vector-based RNAi
approach to target trkA receptors in the nBM/SI region in young and
aged rats [26,40].  Next, we examined brain slices from animals that
have undergone behavioral assessment for 24 months.  Assessment of
GFP/ChAT colocalization revealed that infection persisted in 47 ± 5%
of BF cholinergic neurons, indicating that the vector delivered during
the developmental period could maintain stable gene expression in
aged rats (Fig.  3C).  Additionally, quantitative analysis of trkA immunoreactivity revealed a signiﬁcant reduction of BF trkA protein levels in rats that received AAV-trkA infusions during the postnatal
period (F(1,12) = 2. 17, p < 0. 05; Fig.  3F,G), demonstrating a sustained decrease in trkA levels for 24 months.  It is important to note that
although the reduction in trkA receptors were more robust (79% inhibition) during development as compared to reductions noted in aged
rats (47% inhibition), the diﬀerence appeared to be related to a natural
decline of trkA receptors from the post-natal period to adulthood and
old age (age eﬀect: 6 weeks vs 24 months; p < 0. 01), rather than a loss
of eﬃcacy of the shRNA [19]. 
3. 2.  Developmental trkA knockdown and SAT performance in aging rats
A total of 16 rat pups infused with AAV vectors (N = 8/condition)
began SAT training at 6 months.  The animals required 38 ± 5 training
sessions to attain criterion performance.  One AAV-luc-infused rat never
reached criterion and was excluded from the study.  Average SAT scores
for adult AAV-luc- and AAV-trkA-infused animals examined at 9 monthsof age remained comparable (F(1,10) = 0. 03, p = 0. 98).  The impact of
developmental trkA suppression on attentional capacity in aging animals was assessed by subsequently comparing the performance between AAV-luc and AAV-trkA animals on a bimonthly basis starting
from 12 months of age until the completion of the study at 24 months. 
Behavioral testing was discontinued due to deteriorating health in 4
animals (2/condition) at 16 months of age.  At this time point, the
performance of these rats was similar to other rats that completed the
study (average SAT scores: 0. 41 ± 0. 09 vs 0. 58 ± 0. 05; F(1,14)
= 2. 93, p = 0. 11).  The data from these animals were not included in
subsequent analyses, comparing performance until 24 months of age.  A
mixed ANOVA with signal (3-levels) and age (9 month, 12–24 bimonthly time points; 8-levels) as within-subject factors and trkA manipulation (2-levels) as a between-subject factor was used to analyze
attentional performance.  This analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect
of signal (F(2126) = 130. 55; p < 0. 001), a main eﬀect of age (F
(7126) = 12. 87; p < 0. 001), and a signiﬁcant interaction between the
two factors (F(14,126) = 2. 24; p < 0. 02) on SAT scores.  However,
developmental trkA suppression did not aﬀect attentional performance
(main eﬀect: F(1,9) = 0. 08; p = 0. 78), and no 3-way interaction between age, signal duration and the developmental trkA manipulation on
performance was observed (F(14,126) = 1. 47; p = 0. 13).  To determine
the source of interaction between signal duration-dependent performance and age, a one-way repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted
on SAT scores for each signal.  A consistent decline in attentional performance with rising age was observed in both AAV-luc and AAV-trkAinfused rats for all signal durations (all F(7,63) > 7. 82; p < 0. 001;
Fig.  4A–C).  Post-hoc comparisons revealed that deﬁcits in SAT scores
arose at 24 months on trials with 50 ms and 25 ms signal durations,
respectively (both p < 0. 03 vs 9-month).  Response latencies increased
with age (main eﬀect: F(7,63) = 7. 24; p < 0. 001; see Fig.  3D for
multiple comparisons), and these data are in accordance with human
studies that show decrements in reaction times in attentional tasks in
older adults [48,49].  Like SAT scores, response latencies remained
comparable between the AAV-luc and AAV-trkA animals (F(1,9)
= 0. 10; p = 0. 75), and no interaction between age and vector infusion
was observed on this behavioral measure (F(7,63) = 0. 37; p = 0. 91). 
Aging rats omitted more trials (main eﬀect of age: F(7,63) = 2. 41;
p < 0. 04).  However, omissions did not diﬀer by vector infusion (F
(1,9) = 0. 05; p = 0. 83) and the age x vector infusion interaction remained insigniﬁcant (F(7,63) = 0. 95; p = 0. 47).  Because the rate of
omissions remained very low throughout the behavioral testing of animals (range: 0% − 9. 8%), and SAT scores are not confounded by this
measure (see Methods), the age eﬀect is indicative of subtle changes in
motivational states to perform the task, which does not impact the
composite index of attentional performance. 
3. 3.  Attentional capacities under distracting conditions
To assess the consequences of developmental trkA suppression on
attentional capacity under conditions of high cognitive load in aging
rats, a visual distractor was presented during the second block of the
test session (dSAT) when rats were 12 and 24 months old, respectively. 
A mixed-factor repeated-measures ANOVA with block (3-levels) and
age (2-levels) as within-subject variables displayed a main eﬀect of
block (F(2,18) = 23. 44; p < 0. 001), a main eﬀect of age (F(1,18)
= 6. 98; p < 0. 03), and a signiﬁcant interaction between the two factors F(2,18) = 4. 48; p < 0. 04).  One-way ANOVA showed that at 12
months of age, distractor presentation robustly diminished performance, as noted by a main eﬀect of block (F(2,18) = 22. 28; p < 0. 01),
with a post-hoc analysis demonstrating deﬁcits arising in block 2 (i. e. ,
distractor presentation) compared to block 1 (p < 0. 001) and block 3
(p < 0. 03; Fig.  5A).  However, at 24 months old, this main eﬀect of
block induced by the distractor presentation was no longer observed (F
(2,18) = 1. 21, p = 0. 33; Fig.  5B).  This shift may be attributed to the
overall reduction in attentional performance under baseline conditions
B.  Yegla, V.  Parikh
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 111–121
Fig.  3.  Vector eﬃciency for long-term trkA suppression.  To ensure neuronal infection and vector eﬃciency during development, a pilot group of rat pups underwent AAV-luc and AAVtrkA injection at PND 18–21 and sections were visualized at 6 weeks.  Schematic representation of the AAV vector infusion site targeting the nBM/SI region (highlighted in green) of the BF
containing cholinergic neurons (A; left).  These neurons are present along the ventromedial wall of the globus pallidus (GP) and project to the entire cortex (IC: internal capsule; CP:
caudate putamen).  A representative coronal section taken from a 6-week-old rat infused with AAV-trkA vector depicts the infected BF neurons expressing GFP in the nBM/SI region (A;
right).  (B) Sampled BF area showing GFP-expressing neurons (green), ChAT-positive neurons (red) and colocalization of GFP and ChAT (yellow; merged images) conﬁrm targeting of BF
cholinergic neurons by the vector.  (C) A representative immunostained section from a 24-month-old aged rat that received AAV-luc infusion during the development.  Colocalization of
GFP and ChAT illustrated that vector remained stably expressed in BF cholinergic neurons until 24 months.  Double labeling is depicted by white arrowheads.  BF trkA immunoreactivity
from representative sections taken from 6-week-old rats that received postnatal infusions of either AAV-luc or AAV-trkA vector (D; blue arrows point to trkA-positive neurons).  The
infusion of AAV vector expressing trkA shRNA during PND18-21 produced profound reductions in trkA expression in the nBM/SI region at 6 weeks of age (E).  Representative sections
depict trkA receptor protein expression in the BF from rats that received AAV vector infusions during the postnatal period and underwent behavioral testing for 24 months (F; blue arrows
point to trkA-positive neurons).  Signiﬁcant reduction in BF trkA immunoreactivity was noted in old rats that received developmental infusion of AAV-trkA as compared to the AAV-luc
group (G).  These data illustrate that our AAV vector strategy to knockdown trkA receptors in rats during development could maintain long-lasting reductions in trkA levels until old age. 
Data are represented as mean ± SEM.  *, ** p < 0. 05, 0. 01 vs AAV-luc.  (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article. )
at 24 months (Block 1: F(1,20) = 18. 74; p < 0. 001; 12 vs 24 months)
rather than impaired ability to cope up with a distractor challenge
(Block 3: F(1,20) = 3. 36; p = 0. 08; 12 vs 24 months).  Surprisingly,
AAV-trkA-infused rats performed similarly to AAV-luc-infused rats
under distracting conditions [main eﬀect for trkA manipulation as a
between-subject factor: (F(1,9) = 0. 18, p = 0. 68)] and the three-way
interaction remained insigniﬁcant (block x age x trkA manipulation: F
(2,18) = 2. 44, p = 0. 12).  Because baseline attentional capacity was
aﬀected in both groups at 24 months, we cannot rule out that a ﬂoor
eﬀect might have contributed to the lack of performance diﬀerences in
the distractor session. 
3. 4.  Impact of life-long suppression of trkA receptors on cholinergic function
in attention task-performing rats
The status of cholinergic transmission was determined by in vivo
monitoring of ACh dynamics in the medial PFC from aged rats after the
completion of behavioral testing.  Potassium and nicotine pulses were
locally applied to generate choline spikes that represent hydrolyzed
choline from newly released ACh events and mimic phasic and tonic
characteristics of cholinergic transmission based on its temporal timescale [53–55].  Average second-based increases in extracellular choline
levels recorded following terminal depolarization in the medial PFC are
depicted in Fig.  6A.  The amplitudes of depolarization-evoked cholinergic signals did not diﬀer between the AAV-trkA- and AAV-luc-infused aged rats (F(1,7) = 1. 04, p = 0. 33; Fig.  6B).  Moreover, the
clearance of choline signals remained unaﬀected by the developmental
trkA manipulation (t50: F(1,7) = 0. 66, p = 0. 53; Fig.  6C).  As expected,
local application of nicotine produced a robust increase in cholinergic
transmission that lasted hundreds of seconds in aged rats infused with
the control vector (see population traces in Fig.  6D).  Interestingly, developmental trkA suppression produced a drastic reduction in the amplitudes on nicotine-evoked choline signals (F(1,7) = 2. 32, p < 0. 05;
Fig.  6E).  Additionally, the T50 values of these signals remained signiﬁcantly lower as compared to the AAV-luc-infused rats (F(1,7)
= 2. 57, p < 0. 05; Fig.  6F). B.  Yegla, V.  Parikh
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 111–121
Fig.  4.  Developmental BF trkA suppression and attentional performance in aging rats.  A within-subject comparison of SAT scores for 500 ms (A), 50 ms (B) and 25 ms (C) in aging rats
that received AAV-luc and AAV-trkA into the BF during development.  A general deﬁcit in the ability to detect signals was noted with rising age in both groups (main eﬀect: p < 0. 001)
and this eﬀect interacted with signal duration (p < 0. 02).  Post hoc analyses show that attentional deﬁcits were observed at 24 months as compared to 9 months on trials with shorter
signal durations (50 ms and 25 ms).  (D) In general, response latency increased with aging in both AAV-luc and AAV-trkA groups (p < 0. 001), with a post-hoc revealing signiﬁcantly
slower responding occurring at 12, 14, 18, and 24 months old in comparison to 9 months old.  Data are represented as mean ± SEM.  *p < 0. 05, **p < 0. 01. 
Fig.  5.  Attentional performance under distracting conditions.  Attentional performance under conditions of higher cognitive load was assessed in a dSAT testing session that consisted of
the presentation of a visual distractor (ﬂashing house light at 0. 5 Hz) during the 2nd block of trials.  The presentation of trials in blocks 1 and 3 remained similar to the SAT session.  (A)
Average dSAT scores show robust impairments in attentional performance during block 2 (depicted as green shaded area) as compared to performance in the pre- and post-distractor
blocks (blocks 1 and 3) at 12 months of age.  (B) However, at 24 months of age, the performance remained similar across all 3 blocks.  The impact of the distractor was not prominent due
to an overall reduction in attentional capacity at 24 months vs.  12 months.  Developmental trkA suppression did not impact dSAT performance at either 12 or 24 months (p = 0. 68).  Data
are represented as mean ± SEM.  *p < 0. 05, ***p < 0. 001.  (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. )B.  Yegla, V.  Parikh
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 111–121
Fig.  6.  Impact of life-long trkA suppression on cholinergic function.  In vivo amperometric recordings of prefrontal cholinergic transmission were conducted to evaluate the impact of
developmental trkA reductions on the functional capacity of cortically-projecting BF cholinergic neurons in aging.  (A) Population traces depicting choline spikes, following brief
depolarizing pulses of potassium in the medial PFC, of 24-month-old rats infused with either AAV-luc or AAV-trkA into the BF during development.  The transient increases in extracellular
choline levels reﬂect phasic ACh release and occur as a consequence of rapid hydrolysis of ACh by acetylcholinesterase.  Peak amplitudes (B) and clearance (C) of depolarization-evoked
cholinergic signals remained unaﬀected by the developmental AAV vector manipulation.  (D) Population traces depicting tonic increases in cholinergic transmission following local
application of nicotine in 24-month-old rats.  Developmental trkA knockdown reduced peak signal amplitudes (E) and T50 (F) of nicotine-evoked cholinergic signals.  (G) Representative
coronal sections depicting ChAT-immunopositive neurons (marked by blue arrowheads) from the nBM/SI region of aged rats infused with either AAV-luc or AAV-trkA vector during
development.  (H) The cross-sectional area of cholinergic neurons in aged rats remained unaﬀected by the developmental vector manipulation.  Data are represented as mean ± SEM. 
*p < 0. 05.  (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article. )
The impact of developmental trkA knockdown was also examined
on the morphology of BF cholinergic neurons and cortical cholinergic
terminal density using ChAT immunohistochemistry in the postmortem
brains of aged rats.  As depicted in Fig.  6G and H, the mean cross-sectional area of BF ChAT-positive neurons did not diﬀer between the
AAV-luc- and AAV-trkA-infused rats
(F(1,12) = 0. 82, p = 0. 43). 
Moreover, densitometric analysis of ChAT-positive ﬁbers sampled from
the prelimbic region of the medial PFC exhibited no signiﬁcant diﬀerences
(AAV-luc: 121. 54 ± 14. 39; AAV-trkA:
112. 39 ± 4. 54; F(1,12) = 0. 61, p = 0. 56).  Collectively, these data
indicate that although certain aspects of cholinergic transmission were
aﬀected by developmental trkA suppression in aged rats engaged in an
attention task for the full extent of their lives, the integrity of the cortical cholinergic input system was not impacted. 
<Conclusion> Discussion. 
The cholinotrophic eﬀects of NGF-trkA signaling during development are well established [50,51,35].  Moreover, reduced trkA receptor
density observed in AD subjects has been shown to correlate withdeteriorating cognitive performance [20,24].  Because BF cholinergic
signaling is critical for attentional performance [52,4], we hypothesized
that developmental suppression of trkA signaling would escalate agerelated attentional vulnerability by producing cholinergic disruption. 