
Protein malnutrition is one of the most common health conditions,
aﬀecting human children during the most vulnerable stage of their
development [1].  Adequate nutrition during this critical period is an
essential factor that ensures the normal structural and functional development of the brain [2]; and while there is no doubt that all nutrients are essential for adequate neurodevelopment, proteins appear to
play the most critical role in this period [3].  An insuﬃcient protein diet
during brain development may result in maladaptive structural changes
and, consequently, behavioral deﬁcits [4–8]. 
The eﬀects of nutritional imbalance are aggravated when they occur
during brain development and there is evidence that the earlier the
malnutrition, the more severe, lasting, or permanent are its eﬀects on
brain maturation [9,10].  In fact, the eﬀects of malnutrition on brain
development can lead to severe long-term changes, which may last until
adulthood [10,11].  Neuroanatomical changes due to malnutrition are
not uniform throughout the brain; among the brain regions most affected in early postnatal life, the hippocampus is particularly vulnerable.  The hippocampal formation has been widely studied for its importance in the acquisition and consolidation of memory, and
neuroanatomical changes in the hippocampal formation are correlated
with deﬁcits in learning and memory, which include decreased neuronal density in the CA1 and CA3 regions caused by malnutrition
[12–14].  It has also been demonstrated that malnourished rats were
slower to learn an eﬃcient search strategy on the Morris water maze
(MWM), requiring more time to ﬁnd the hidden platform, and showed
retention deﬁcits on the probe-trial indicated by impaired performance
in recalling the former position of the platform [5,13].  Cordoba Name
[15] showed that malnutrition also induces deﬁcits in eﬃcient navigation even after a long period of nutritional recovery.  In the same vein,
Braga Name reported that protein malnutrition in early life was responsible for impaired performance in recognition memory in adult rats
and even after nutritional recovery they were unable to reach the
⁎ Corresponding author at: Laboratório de Neuroanatomia, Departamento de Cirurgia e Anatomia, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, USP, Av.  Bandeirantes 3900, 14049-900,
Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil. 
E-mail address: jjlachat@fmrp. usp. br (J. -J.  Lachat). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 012
Received 1 June 2017; Received in revised form 25 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 08 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
R. O.  Soares Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 55–62
recognition indices demonstrated by control animals [16].  Lukoyanov
and Andrade [13] demonstrated that the total number of neurons in the
granular layer of the dentate gyrus and pyramidal neurons in the CA1
region was signiﬁcantly reduced even after a period of nutritional rehabilitation.  All these results indicate that malnutrition may result in
irreversible consequences to the normal development of the hippocampal formation and its function in learning and memory. 
It is well known that the brain is remarkably responsive to its interaction with the environment and this can shape its development. 
Studies have shown consistently alteration in the morphological, biochemical, and molecular processes of brain development due to environmental stimulation, mainly when performed during the early days
of life [17–21].  It has also been demonstrated that when animals are
exposed to environmental enrichment, which is a combination of
complex inanimate, social, visual, and sensorial stimulation, this may
lead to neuroanatomical changes in the hippocampus that diﬀer from
those in animals living in standard conditions, which include increases
in hippocampal thickness and volume [22–24], in the number of
granule and glial cells [23,24], in dendritic spine density [25,26],
hippocampal progenitor proliferation and neurogenesis [27,28], and
alterations in receptor expression [29].  The beneﬁcial eﬀects of environmental enrichment are not limited to neuroanatomy, and it has
been showed to induce improvements in spatial learning performance
[24,30,31].  Studies have reported that the possible cause for these
structural and behavioral changes is related to changes in brain neurochemistry.  Indeed, environmental enrichment increases the expression of factors associated with enhanced spatial ability and neurogenesis, such as the brain-derived neurotrophic factor and vascular
endothelial growth factor [32–36]. 
Although some eﬀects of protein malnutrition have been shown to
be permanent, a degree of protection can be obtained through an enriched early experience.  Growing evidence reveals that malnourished
rats can achieve some prophylaxis by exposure to an enriched environment [20,29,37,38].  However, there are no studies showing
whether the protective eﬀect of environmental enrichment on hippocampal neuroanatomy and its function in learning and memory can be
extended to adult rats maintained on a protein malnutrition diet early
in life.  Thus, based on all the preceding studies examining the inﬂuence
of environmental enrichment on brain and behavior, we hypothesized
that it is plausible that such an experience could be protective against
neuroanatomical changes in the hippocampus and memory impairment
in protein-deﬁcient rats exposed to an enriched environment, for 1 h
per day, during the ﬁrst 35 d of life.  The purpose of this study was to
investigate learning and memory performance and hippocampal morphology of adult rats maintained on a protein-deﬁcient diet in the early
postnatal period and the possible beneﬁts produced by environmental
enrichment under this condition.  To elucidate the protective eﬀects of
environmental enrichment, we used the MWM and structural analysis
to determine whether changes in spatial memory and the number and
size of CA1 neurons, caused by early malnutrition, were signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent between an enriched and non-enriched group. 
<Middle> Experimental procedures. 
2. 1.  Animals
Forty-eight male Wistar rats, from the animal colony at the Ribeirão
Preto campus of the University of São Paulo, were used.  According to
the experimental protocol previously established in our laboratory, on
the day of birth, each litter was culled to 6 male and 2 female pups
housed with the dam in transparent plastic cages (40 × 25 × 20 cm)
during the lactation period, from postnatal day (P) 0 to P21.  During the
lactation period, the dams and entire litters were weighed once a week. 
Weaning occurred on P21 and consisted of separation of the dams and
female pups that were not used in this study to avoid possible result
variation related to the estrous cycle.  Male rats were reared in pairs instandard polypropylene cages (30 × 19 × 18 cm) and they were
weighed individually once a week, until P70. 
Rats were randomly divided into two dietary groups: well-nourished, with a diet containing 16% protein (W), and malnourished, with
a diet containing 6% protein (M).  Diets were prepared according to
proportions recommended by the American Institute of Nutrition and
the Association of Oﬃcial Agriculture Chemists, with the addition of
methionine and choline as described by Cambraia Name [39].  Essentially, the low protein diet consisted of 6% protein (casein), 79. 8% corn
starch, 8% lipids (corn oil), 5% salt mixture, 1% vitamin mixture, 0. 2%
choline, and methionine (2 g/kg of casein).  The W diet was composed
of 16% protein (casein), 69. 8% corn starch, 8% lipids (corn oil), 5% salt
mixture, 1% vitamin mixture, 0. 2% choline, and methionine (2 g/kg of
casein).  Rats were subjected to the experimental diet from birth to P35;
during the lactation period, the diet was oﬀered only to the mother and
the pups were weaned onto the same diet as their respective mothers
until P35.  From P36 to the sacriﬁce day, they were maintained on a diet
containing 16% protein. 
The W and M groups were further subdivided into two groups according to the early environmental treatment: enriched (E) and nonenriched (N) environment. 
Thus, we established four experimental groups: Well-nourished and
Non-enriched (WN, n = 12 newborn rats/group); Well-nourished and
Enriched (WE); Malnourished and Non-enriched (MN); Malnourished
and Enriched (ME). 
2. 2.  Environmental enrichment
In this condition, rats were exposed to environmental enrichment
from P8 to P21 and from P22 to P35.  The enrichment between P8 and
P21 consisted of a transparent plastic cage (40 × 25 × 20 cm) which
contained activity wheels, tunnels, plastic toys (with diﬀerent shapes
and textures), marbles, objects that emitted sounds (e. g. , rattles), mirrors, and pieces of wood.  Each litter that was assigned to the E group
was placed in the enriched environment, without their mothers, for 1 h
per day; litters were then returned to their mothers in their respective
home cages.  The groups not exposed to an enriched environment during
the lactation period were kept in a home cage, but were separated from
their mothers during the same period of time as the rats in the enriched
condition.  From P22 to P35, a cage (40 × 60 × 90 cm) with three
ﬂoors, connected with ramps, containing an activity wheel, plastic toys,
rubber balls, wooden objects with diﬀerent shapes, textures and colors,
objects that could emit sound when touched by the animals, and mirrors on the lateral walls were used for the E protocol [37,38,40].  Seven
to ten rats from each enrichment group were placed in the enriched
cage at the same time.  These rats were exposed to the enriched environment for 1 h per day [37,38], after which each rat was returned to
its home cage.  The toys and objects in the enriched cage were changed
weekly to guarantee a novelty eﬀect [40–42]. 
2. 3.  Behavioral testing
Beginning at P70 rats (12 animals per group) were tested on the
Morris Water Maze (MWM) using a procedure similar to that described
by Fukuda at al.  [43] based on the original task described by Morris
[44].  Testing took place between 08:00 am and 10:00 am, in a room
with controlled luminosity and temperature.  The maze apparatus was a
circular tank (1. 5 m diameter × 39 cm height) with black walls, divided into four imaginary quadrants numbered in a clockwise fashion
(quadrants 1, 2, 3, and 4).  The tank was ﬁlled with water and a clear
Plexiglas circular platform (12 cm diameter × 25 cm height) was
placed at a ﬁxed position inside the tank and completely submerged
1. 5 cm below the water level.  This apparatus was located in a room that
contained distal visual cues such as pictures on the wall, door, and
window.  The swim path for each rat on every trial was recorded using a
tracking system (Ethovision®, Noldus, Wageningen, the Netherlands),
R. O.  Soares Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 55–62
Fig.  1.  Changes in the body weight of studied animals.  Well-nourished and non-enriched (WN), well-nourished and enriched (WE), malnourished and non-enriched (MN) and malnourished and enriched (ME) groups.  A – Weekly maternal body weights during the lactation period: protein-deﬁcient diet induced a higher loss rate according to the weekly body weight
measurements.  B – Weekly body weight of the entire litters during lactation period: the growth curve of litters maintained on a protein-deﬁcient diet showed milder progression; #
p < 0. 001 indicating eﬀect of days; * p < 0. 001 indicating eﬀect of diet; Bars represent standard error of the mean. 
recording the experimental sessions from above the maze. 
Twelve daily trials were performed on two consecutive days, totaling 24 trials.  The trial consisted of placing a rat into the water facing
the tank edge at one of four imaginary quadrants.  The rat was release
and allowed to swim for up to 60 s to ﬁnd the hidden platform.  A trial
was terminated if the rat failed to ﬁnd the platform after the established
time.  For every attempt, the ﬁrst rat was placed in a randomly selected
quadrant.  The sequence of the animal position at each attempt was
maintained for all animals tested.  After the experimental sessions on the
second day, the platform was removed and the animals were placed in
the quadrant diagonally opposite to the previous location of the platform [44]. 
2. 4.  Histological procedures
Once behavioral testing was completed (P73), six animals from each
group were weighed and anesthetized with ketamine (22 mg/kg) and
intracardially perfused with saline solution in 0. 05 M phosphate buﬀer
at pH 7. 3, followed by a 4% paraformaldehyde in 0. 1 M phosphate
buﬀer, also at pH 7. 3.  The brains were then removed from the skull,
weighed and immediately immersed in the same ﬁxative solution, and
stored at 4 °C for approximately 72 h to complete the ﬁxation process. 
Fixed tissues were dehydrated in an ascending ethanol series and diaphanized in ascending concentrations of xylene.  They were subsequently embedded in paraﬃn using standard histology techniques. 
Coronal serial sections were sliced into 5-μm-thick slices at the level of
the dorsal hippocampus (Interaural 5. 40 mm; Bregma −3. 60 mm, from
Paxinos and Watson’s rat brain atlas [45]) using a HM315 microtome
(Waldorf, Germany).  The sections were mounted on conventional histological slides and stained with Masson’s Trichrome to evaluate the
integrity of the hippocampus and its cellular components under a light
microscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) equipped with a wide ﬁeld
ocular lens at a magniﬁcation of 10×, 40× and 100×. 
In order to determine whether the changes observed in the cytoarchitecture of the dorsal hippocampus signiﬁcantly diﬀered among
groups, quantitative analysis of the data was performed blind to conditions using the ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, USA),
in three deﬁned regions of interest (ROI) per rat, distributed in the CA1
region.  All neurons with a visible nucleus were counted in the ROIs at
40× magniﬁcation (length: 0. 287 mm).  The ﬁrst counting ROI was
placed on the apex of CA1 and the other two ROIs were placed on either
side of the apex.  The number of neurons was determined by dividing
the number of hippocampal CA1 neurons by the CA1 layer’s length (i. e. ,
neurons per mm of CA1 cell layer).  The three ROIs method was previously described by Wang Name [46]. 
To ensure that the changes in the number of neurons was not due to
potential sampling error of diﬀerent sized neurons, an analysis of
neuronal body size was performed.  Approximately 1000 neurons per
group were measured outlining the entire neuronal body boundary.  All
values from each animal were used to create a mean value per animal
and the data were distributed according to size in a distribution histogram for percentage of neurons.  The neuron size histograms were
separated into class intervals increasing by 5 μm2. 
2. 5.  Statistical analysis
All values are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean. 
The body weight (diet, postnatal day, and enrichment) and behavioral
data (diet, postnatal day, and enrichment) were tested using a threeway analysis of variance (ANOVA).  Two-way ANOVAs with group
(Well-nourished or Malnourished) and treatment (Environmental enrichment or No enrichment) as variables were performed to determine
neuroanatomical outcomes and any interactions.  All ANOVAs were
followed by Newman-Keuls post hoc tests for multiple comparisons.  In
all analyses, the level of signiﬁcance was set at P < 0. 05. 
3.  Results
3. 1.  Eﬀects of enriched environment on body weight of the early
malnourished rats
A signiﬁcant eﬀect of days (F (3,15) = 143. 87, p < 0. 001) and diet
and day interaction (F (3,15) = 38. 7, p < 0. 001) on the body weight
of the dams were observed.  These data suggest that the dams maintained on a protein-deﬁcient diet presented a lower body weight than
did dams maintained on a protein-adequate diet, and this signiﬁcant
diﬀerence was age-dependent, indicating that the dams in the protein
deﬁcient group had a higher loss rate according to the weekly body
weight measurements (Fig.  1A). 
litters,
At birth (day 0), we found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence among newborns, conﬁrming that all rats were in the same nutritional condition at
the beginning of the experimental treatment.  During the lactation
period, we recorded the weight per litter and after weaning the weight
was registered individually.  Analysis of body weight based on weekly
measurements showed a progressive and signiﬁcant increase in weightindicating an eﬀect of day (F (3,15) = 142. 01,
p < 0. 001).  However, the growth curve of litters maintained on a
protein-deﬁcient diet showed milder progression, indicating a lower
growth rate than did litters maintained on a protein-adequate diet, but
still signiﬁcant (P ≤ 0. 001).  In addition, litters maintained on a protein-deﬁcient diet had a lower body weight than did age-matched litters
maintained on the protein-adequate diet, indicating an eﬀect of diet (F
(1,5) = 56. 68, p < 0. 001).  The analysis of variance also demonstrated
a signiﬁcant diet and day interaction (F (3,15) = 26. 21, p < 0. 001),
but no signiﬁcant eﬀect of enrichment (Fig.  1B). 
After weaning, the analysis of variance demonstrated a signiﬁcantR. O.  Soares Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 55–62
Fig.  2.  Changes in the body weight of studied animals.  Individual body weight from wellnourished and non-enriched (WN), well-nourished and enriched (WE), malnourished and
non-enriched (MN) and malnourished and enriched (ME) rats after weaning.  Proteindeﬁcient diet induced a lower body weight, even after protein intake normalization with a
diet containing 16% protein; # p < 0. 001 indicating eﬀect of days; * p < 0. 001 indicating eﬀect of diet; Δ p < 0. 05 indicating eﬀect of enrichment; Bars represent standard error of the mean. 
eﬀect of day (F (7, 39) = 1279. 8, p < 0. 001), diet (F (1, 57)
= 2012. 41, p < 0. 001), and enrichment (F (1, 57) = 5. 19, p < 0. 05)
variables.  The analysis also revealed a day, diet, and enrichment interaction on body weight (F (7, 39) = 4. 08; p < 0,001).  These results
indicate that the rats maintained on the protein-deﬁcient diet presented
lower weight than did rats maintained on the protein-adequate diet,
and also, even after postnatal day 35 with the transition to the proteinadequate diet, the animals subjected to early malnourishment maintained a lower weight for the duration of the experimental period,
conﬁrming the long-lasting eﬀect of malnutrition on body weight
(Fig.  2). 
3. 2.  Eﬀects of enriched environment on the spatial learning of the early
malnourished rats
The adult rats maintained on the protein-deﬁcient diet early in life
required more time to ﬁnd the hidden platform than animals maintained on the protein-adequate diet, presenting a signiﬁcant eﬀect of
diet (F (1,26) = 7. 11, p < 0. 05) as well as conﬁrming the long-lasting
impairment eﬀect on memory due to early protein malnutrition. 
Interestingly, behavioral performance was enhanced in adult rats
maintained on the protein-deﬁcient diet that were exposed to environmental enrichment early in life (F (1,26) = 12. 36, p < 0. 01),
reﬂecting the eﬀectiveness of environmental enrichment in reversing
the impairment.  Analysis of variance also demonstrated a signiﬁcant
eﬀect of trials (F (3,59) = 21. 07, p < 0. 001),
indicating that all
groups had a progressive decrease in the time required to ﬁnd the
hidden platform through the trials.  However, the learning curve of the
malnourished but non-enriched rats showed milder progression, reﬂecting an impairment in the learning process and showing that malnourished rats were slower to learn an eﬃcient search strategy on the
task (Fig.  3). 
3. 3.  Eﬀects of enriched environment on the number of neurons of the early
malnourished rats
The morphological analysis of CA1 neurons of the animals in the
protein-deﬁcient group revealed mild disorganization when compared
to the animals from the protein-adequate group; furthermore, some of
these neurons were shrunk and dark, which suggests pyknotic or degenerated neurons (Fig.  4).  The neuron quantiﬁcation analysis presented a signiﬁcant eﬀect of diet (F (1,17) = 6. 56, p < 0. 01), indicating that adult rats maintained on the protein-deﬁcient diet early in
life had a lower number of CA1 neurons than did adult rats maintained
on the protein-adequate diet (P < 0. 05).  The quantiﬁcation analysis
Fig.  3.  Performance in the Morris Water Maze test.  Latency to ﬁnd the hidden platform
over attempts during trials in MWM test from well-nourished and non-enriched (WN),
well-nourished and enriched (WE), malnourished and non-enriched (MN) and malnourished and enriched (ME) rats.  Adult rats maintained on the protein-deﬁcient diet
early in life required more time to ﬁnd the hidden platform, however, the performance
was enhanced in adult rats maintained on the protein-deﬁcient diet that were exposed to
environmental enrichment early in life.  # p < 0. 001 indicating eﬀect of days; *
p < 0. 001 indicating eﬀect of diet; Δ p < 0. 05 indicating eﬀect of enrichment; Bars
represent standard error of the mean. 
enrichment
also demonstrated an eﬀect of
(F (1,17) = 6. 38,
p < 0. 01).  Thus, this result reﬂected that whereas a protein-deﬁcient
diet early in life results in long-lasting decrease in the number of CA1
neurons,
treatment protected their
number to a degree comparable to adult rats maintained on a proteinadequate diet (Fig.  5A). 
the environmental enrichment
In contrast to the neuronal number diﬀerence among groups, the
body size of neurons, measured by total cross-sectional area of the
neuronal somata, did not reach statistical signiﬁcance (Fig.  5B).  The
neuron size distribution showed a similar bimodal distribution in body
cell size among groups, with the ﬁrst peak size between 15–20 μm2 and
the second peak size between 35–45 μm2 in all studied groups (Fig.  6). 
<Conclusion> Discussion. 
In the present study, we addressed the possibility of preventing
memory impairment and neuroanatomical changes in the hippocampus
of adult rats maintained on a protein-deﬁcient diet in the early postnatal period exposing them to an environmental enrichment treatment. 
We observed that the ﬁndings of the current study are in accordance
with previous reports that early protein deﬁciency produces important
long-lasting eﬀects on neuroanatomy and behavior in rats.  The protective eﬀect of the environmental enrichment treatment was determined based on the results of a spatial memory task and on the
hippocampal neuroanatomy of adult rats maintained on a protein-deﬁcient diet early in life, completely reversing the eﬀects of protein
malnutrition in the measured parameters for brain and behavior.  The
results shown here are consistent with our hypothesis that environmental enrichment may act preventatively against spatial memory
impairment and hippocampal neuroanatomical alterations in adult rats
maintained on a protein-deﬁcient diet during the critical period of brain
development.  We consider each ﬁnding separately. 
4. 1.  Eﬀects of environmental enrichment on body weight of the early
malnourished rats
The analysis of the body weight of the dams indicated a progressive
weight loss during the lactation period; however, the dams maintained
on a protein-deﬁcient diet presented greater weight loss than did dams
maintained on a protein-adequate diet.  This diﬀerence appeared on the
ﬁrst week and became more evident from the second week of deﬁcient
intake of protein, as has been previously found in other studies
[16,20,39,47].  This progressive weight loss in all dams during theR. O.  Soares Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 55–62
Fig.  4.  Representative photomicrographs of coronal brain sections at the level of the dorsal hippocampus.  Well-nourished and non-enriched (WN – A), well-nourished and enriched (WE –
B), malnourished and non-enriched (MN – C) and malnourished and enriched (ME – D) rats at P73, showing CA1 neurons.  Arrow = Shrunken and dark neurons, which suggest pyknotic
or degenerated neurons; SP = Stratum Pyramidale; SR = Stratum Radiatum; Magniﬁcation = 20×. 
lactation period may be explained by the utilization of body tissues for
milk production and by the high-energy expenditure related to maternal care.  Moreover, milk production and the necessary energy expenditure for maternal behavior combined with continuous low protein
consumption can lead to insuﬃcient amino acid levels, which may interfere with body maintenance, thus causing intense weight loss in the
malnourished dams [5,16,39]. 
The reduction in body weight from the second week of life in the
pups that experienced protein malnutrition can be attributed to the
deﬁcient intake of protein by the dams and, consequently, protein deﬁciency in the maternal milk [5,20,38]. 