
Public health messages delivered in video format are the mainstay
of smoking-cessation campaigns that have contributed to the decline in
smoking prevalence in the US (Woloshin, Schwartz, & Welch, 2008). 
Yet, despite these eﬀorts, smoking remains a leading cause of mortality
and morbidity worldwide, and is responsible for more than 480,000
deaths annually in the United States alone (U. S.  Department of Health
and Human Services, 2014).  Therefore, it is imperative to identify the
factors that inﬂuence audiences’ cognitive processing of smoking-cessation videos (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2012). 
Sensory features, which attract viewer’s attention through engaging visuals, edits, and music, have been hypothesized to be one such factor
(D’Silva and Palmgreen, 2007; Helme, Donohew, Baier, & Zittleman, 2007;
Morgan, Palmgreen, Stephenson, Hoyle, & Lorch, 2003).  Message sensation
value (MSV) is a validated measure that has been developed to quantify
such sensory features in health promotion videos (Morgan Name, 2003).  The
prevailing assumption that higher MSV improves cognitive processing and
eﬀectiveness of health promotion videos has been challenged by recent
neuroimaging studies, which found that videos with lower MSV were better
remembered and elicited greater prefrontal and temporal
response
(Langleben Name, 2009; Seelig Name, 2014).  These ﬁndings are consistent
with predictions of the limited cognitive capacity theories.  These theories
suggest that although high MSV attracts viewers’ attention, it also diverts
cognitive resources from processing the health information content in the
videos (Petty and Cacioppo, 1986; Wilson and Wolf, 2009). 
While these studies question the value of utilizing high MSV as an
eﬀective communication tool, they do not address the possibility that
individual diﬀerences in attention to sensory stimulation may be responsible for the lack of eﬀectiveness of high-MSV videos at a population level (Everett and Palmgreen, 1995; Stephenson and Palmgreen,
2001).  Such diﬀerences would have been of purely academic interest in
the era of network television, but as media becomes more personalized,
individual diﬀerences in the neurocognitive processing of health promotion videos begin to acquire real life relevance (Chua Name, 2011). 
Yet, experimental data on the biological basis of individual diﬀerences
in the cognitive processing of health messages are very limited. 