
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a serious illness that aﬄicts up
to 10% of the adult population in the United States and represents one
of the leading causes of disability around the world [1].  With an estimated lifetime prevalence of more than 3. 5% in China [2], it is predicted to become the second leading cause of disability by the year
2020 [3].  Aside from mortality associated with suicide, depressed patients are more likely to develop cardiovascular disease and type 2
diabetes than non-depressed patients [4]. 
Current treatments of MDD are based on improving clinical symptoms, such as low spirits, lack of lucidity, activity decline, and some
somatic symptoms.  Several eﬀective treatments for depressed patients
have been established, such as cognitive therapy [5], interpersonal
therapy [6], electroconvulsive therapy [7], electrical stimulation of the
vagus nerve [8], and pharmacotherapy with antidepressants.  Drug
therapy is currently the ﬁrst-line treatment.  Many antidepressants have
been approved for the treatment of MDD, such as selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, and norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake inhibitors.  The
main SNRIs are duloxetine and venlafaxine [9].  Venlafaxine is a secondgeneration antidepressant that is widely used in a clinical context [10]. 
It can signiﬁcantly improve the clinical symptoms of patients with depression and its antidepressant eﬀects have been studied by our team
[11].  However, the molecular mechanism underlying its rapid antidepressant actions is unclear. 
The hippocampus is a major component of the brain in humans, and
it is an important part of the emotional center.  It is associated with a
variety of aﬀective disorders, and has therefore frequently been used as
a model system for neurophysiological studies.  Previous studies revealed that exposure to stressful experiences decreased proliferation
and neurogenesis in the hippocampus of adult animals [12,13], with
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 402460, China. 
E-mail address: xiepeng@cqmu. edu. cn (P.  Xie). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 011
Received 25 May 2017; Received in revised form 31 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 08 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
P.  Shen Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 63–70
these features being increased by chronic use of antidepressants
[13,14]. 
Metabolomics is the scientiﬁc study of chemical processes involving
metabolites.  It is also an approach frequently used in the study of the
pathogenesis of depression and the eﬀects of antidepressant drugs
[15–22].  Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS), combining
the advantage of the high separation capacity of chromatography with
the high discriminant characteristics of mass spectrometry, is ideal for
the separation, and qualitative and quantitative analyses of complex
mixed samples [23]. 
To explore the potential biological eﬀects of venlafaxine on mouse
hippocampus, we applied a non-targeted metabolomic approach based
on GC–MS technology to characterize the global metabolic proﬁle in
mouse hippocampus following the systemic administration of venlafaxine.  The diﬀerentially expressed metabolites were analyzed to create
molecular interaction networks and the core proteins BDNF, p-c-Raf, pMAPK, p-MEK, p-AKT, and CREB involved in these networks were validated by western blotting.  Our primary aims were to identify the
biological mechanisms underlying the eﬀects of venlafaxine and to
provide new ideas for future research on antidepressants. 
<Middle> Materials and methods. 
2. 1.  Animals
Twenty healthy male C57BL/6J mice, aged 8 weeks old and
weighing 18–20 g, were purchased from the Laboratory Animal Center
of Chongqing Medical University (Chongqing, China).  During the entire
study, all of the experimental animals lived under simulated natural
light (12-h light/dark cycle), in an environment with optimal temperature (22 ± 1 °C) and appropriate humidity (50 ± 5%) with ad
libitum access to food and water.  All procedures in this study conformed to the National Institutes of Health’s Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals (revised 1996) [24], and the study was approved
by the Ethics Committee of Chongqing Medical University. 
analysis. 
2. 4.  GC–MS analysis
capillary
column (Agilent
GC–MS analysis was performed in accordance with a previous study
[16].  In brief, a GC 7890A/5975C system (Agilent Co. ) equipped with
an HP–5 ms
J & W Scientiﬁc Co. )
(30 m × 0. 25 mm × 0. 25 μm) was used.  A total of 0. 5 μL of derivative
was injected into the capillary column.  The temperatures of the injection port, the EI iron source, and the quadrupole rods were 280 °C,
230 °C, and 150 °C, respectively.  Helium gas (purity > 99. 999%) acted
as a carrier gas with a ﬂow rate of 6 mL/min.  The temperature of the
capillary column was kept at 70 °C for 2 min, increased to 160 °C at a
rate of 6 °C/min, elevated to 240 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min, increased to
300 °C at a higher rate of 20 °C/min, and then maintained at 300 °C for
6 min.  Mass spectrometry was performed in full scan mode and the
detection range was 50–600 (m/z). 
2. 5.  GC–MS data analysis
In this study, data preprocessing was carried out in the R software
platform, including baseline ﬁltering, peak identiﬁcation, integration,
retention time correction, peak alignment, and mass spectral fragmentation analysis.  Editing of data was performed after the analyses to
eliminate impurities from column loss and sample preparation in
Excel2010 software, and the ﬁnal results were converted to a 2D data
matrix.  This matrix included sample information, retention time, and
mass spectrometry data.  The normalized data matrix was imported into
the SIMCA-P 14. 1 software package (Umetrics AB, Umeå, Sweden). 
Orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) was
used to identify the metabolic diﬀerences between the groups.  Variable
important in projection (VIP) greater than 1 and p < 0. 05 were considered to indicate a signiﬁcant diﬀerence.  Seven-cycle interactive
veriﬁcation and the 200-response sequencing test method were used to
investigate the quality of the model. 
2. 2.  Animal treatment
2. 6.  Metabolic function analyses
All mice were randomly divided into a venlafaxine group (VLX
group) and a control group (CON group) after 1 week of adaptive
feeding.  The VLX group (n = 11) was intraperitoneally injected with
venlafaxine (Sigma-Aldrich, St.  Louis, MO, USA) diluted in normal
saline to a dose of 16 mg/kg (200 μL).  Meanwhile, the CON group
(n = 9) was intraperitoneally injected with normal saline (200 μL). 
This was performed daily between 8:00 A. M.  and 9:00 A. M.  for 14 days. 
Functional analyses of the metabolites that discriminated between
the groups were implemented using MetaboAnalyst 3. 0 [25].  MetaboAnalyst is a set of online tools for metabolomic data analysis and
interpretation, pathway analysis, and visualization [26].  Based on the
human metabolome database (HMDB) within this tool, the diﬀerential
metabolites were uploaded to a webpage using the MetaboAnalyst tool,
and the biological function of each metabolite was carefully analyzed. 
2. 3.  Sample preparation
2. 7.  Molecular pathway and network analyses
After being anesthetized with ether, all of the mice were quickly
decapitated.  Their brains were dissected on ice to obtain the hippocampus.  The hippocampus was then rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen
for 30 s and stored at −80 °C until analysis.  Before analysis, each frozen
hippocampus was homogenized by a tissue homogenizer (Jingxin
Technology, Shanghai, China) after adding 20 μL of internal standard
(l-2-chlorophenylalanine at 0. 03 mg/mL; Sigma Co. ) and 500 μL of
methanol–water–chloroform solution (5:2:2, v/v/v).  The mixture was
sonicated for 5 min, incubated for 20 min on ice, and then centrifuged
at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C.  A total of 300 μL of supernatant was
then transferred to a glass bottle for vacuum drying.  After adding 80 μL
of methoxyamine pyridine hydrochloride solution (15 mg/mL; Macklin
Co. ) to the dried extract and shaking it for 2 min, the oximation reaction was carried out at 37 °C for 90 min.  Subsequently, 80 μL of BSTFA
(1% TMCS) (Sigma Co. ) and 20 μL of normal hexane were added, followed by shaking for 2 min, after which the mixture was incubated for
60 min in an incubator at 70 °C.  After leaving the mixture to stand at
room temperature for 30 min, the derivative was prepared for GC–MS
At present, IPA is the most complete and accurate biomedical analysis software and database globally.  For comprehensive investigation
of the molecular network representing the metabolic diﬀerences in the
hippocampus between VLX and CON groups, the metabolite lists with
KEGG IDs, PUBCHE IDs, fold change, and p-value were uploaded onto
the IPA server.  Highly correlated molecular networks were generated in
the ingenuity pathway knowledge base.  Based on the degree of correlation between the metabolic diﬀerences and the network, a score was
generated.  The higher the score, the more relevant the network. 
2. 8.  Western blotting validation
Western blotting is a widely used analytical technique applied in the
ﬁeld of molecular biology to detect speciﬁc proteins in a sample of
tissue homogenate.  In this study, after electrophoresis, the proteins
were transferred to a membrane (polyvinylidene ﬂuoride: PVDF) where
they were stained with antibodies speciﬁc to the target protein [27,28]. 
The hippocampal tissue was fully reacted with RIPA solution containingP.  Shen Name
phosphatase inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) at 4 °C, processed by
ultrasound, and ﬁnally subjected to low-temperature centrifugation to
obtain the target protein.  The proteins in the sample were separated
using a 10%–12% SDS polyacrylamide gel, and then transferred to a
PVDF membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) for blocking.  Then, the
proteins were incubated with rabbit monoclonal anti-phospho-p44/
42MAPK (ERK1/2) (Cell Signaling, 1:1000), rabbit monoclonal antiphospho-c-Raf
rabbit monoclonal antiphospho-AKT (Cell Signaling, 1:3000), rabbit monoclonal anti-CREB
(Cell Signaling, 1:1000),
rabbit monoclonal anti-BDNF (Abcam,
1:2000), rabbit monoclonal anti-phospho-MEK (Cell Signaling, 1:2000),
mouse monoclonal anti-GAPDH (Bio-Rad, 1:12,000), mouse monoclonal anti-tubulin (Bio-Rad, 1:12,000), or rabbit monoclonal anti-βactin (Bio-Rad, 1:10,000) overnight at 4 °C and then incubated with
secondary anti-rabbit antibodies (1:10,000) for 2 h.  The signals were
visualized using an ECL kit (Millipore). 
(Cell Signaling, 1:1000),
2. 9.  Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses comparing the two groups were carried out
using IBM SPSS Statistics Version 21 (IBM Co. , USA).  The parametric
two-tailed Student’s t-test was applied to analyze the signiﬁcance of
diﬀerences between the two groups.  A p-value less than 0. 05 was
deemed to indicate statistical signiﬁcance. 
3.  Results
3. 1.  Metabolomic analysis
The total ion chromatogram of all samples showed a strong signal,
high peak capacity, and good reproducibility.  The internal standard
peaks and any known false positive peaks (including noise, column loss,
and derivative reagent peaks) were removed from the data matrix, and
then 229 individual peaks were detected in the VLX and CON groups,
which were used in the subsequent multivariate analysis.  The OPLS-DA
score plots also showed a clear diﬀerence between the two groups
(R2X = 0. 769, R2Y = 0. 