
THC and other components in marijuana are among the most
commonly used illicit drugs in the world.  A recent report [1] indicates
over 181 million users world-wide, while an estimated 13. 1 million
people exhibit cannabis dependence globally [2].  Marijuana usage is
increasing in many countries, [3] and chronic use appears to be a risk
factor for several mental illnesses including psychosis [4] and depression [5].  Moreover, chronic use is also linked to reduced performance
on decision-making tasks [6,7].  It is therefore important to better understand how THC aﬀects the neural processes involved in cognition
and decision-making.  Previous studies have indicated deﬁcits in executive function, verbal and visual memory, and visuoperception following chronic cannabis use in humans [8].  Rodent models have likewise shown impairments in working memory [9,10] and spatial
memory [11] following acute THC administration.  Furthermore, acute
THC causes impairments in reversal learning in macaques [12], as well
as reversal learning and intradimensional set shifting impairments in
rats [13,14].  These ﬁndings have led to the proposal that THC impairs
cognitive ﬂexibility.  This is a nebulous term; for the purpose of this
paper we deﬁne cognitive ﬂexibility as the ability to change response
strategies when it is advantageous to do so.  Cognitive ﬂexibility is inﬂuenced by distinct neural processes that may compete or cooperate to
modulate behaviour [15].  For example, animals can learn to select
options based on action value estimates acrued over many trials (reinforcement learning), or could instead use heuristics to guide choice
[16].  Animals may also rely on innate strategies such as the propensity
to switch choices after reward omission, a widespread phenomenon
termed lose-shift responding [17–20].  These and other systems can be
used to derive choice, and can all manifest as cognitive ﬂexibility. 
A common methodological feature in reversal learning and set
shifting paradigms is a sudden and unexpected change in reward contingencies, which is used to assess how animals adapt choice strategy. 
Both lose-shift and reinforcement learning strategies are likely engaged
in these paradigms.  A physiological mechanism thought to be important
for such reinforcement-driven response adaptations is the reward prediction error (RPE) signaling properties of midbrain dopamine neurons
[21–23].  These neurons brieﬂy increase ﬁring rate following unexpectedly good reinforcements (rewards), signaling a positive RPE. 
Conversely, these neurons decrease ﬁring following unexpectedly poor
⁎ Corresponding author at: University of Lethbridge, Department of Neuroscience, Canadian Centre for Behavioural Neuroscience, Polaris Brain Dynamics Research Group, 4401
University Drive West, Lethbridge, AB, Canada. 
E-mail address: aaron. gruber@uleth. ca (A. J.  Gruber). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 009
Received 12 May 2017; Received in revised form 28 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 12 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
S. A.  Wong Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 136–144
reinforcements such as reward omission, signaling a negative RPE.  This
RPE signal is suﬃcient to solve a variety of diﬃcult tasks [24].  Drugs or
diseases that aﬀect dopamine transmission are therefore expected to
impair this prediction error, and thereby impair reinforcement learning,
which has been demonstrated in many species and tasks [25–28]. 
Similar to other drugs of abuse, THC increases the ﬁring rates of
midbrain dopamine neurons [29] and increases dopamine release in
downstream targets such as the ventral striatum [30].  THC acts as an
agonist at the Cannabinoid Receptor 1 (CB1), which is Gi coupled and
acts as an inhibitory presynaptic regulator of neurotransmitter release
[31].  CB1 is located on inhibitory aﬀerents to dopamine neurons [32]. 
It is therefore likely that CB1 agonism reduces inhibitory input to dopamine neurons.  We expect that this will suppress the pause in dopamine neuron ﬁring following reward omission and thereby attenuate
the negative RPE.  This should attenuate processes driven by reward
omission, such as lose-shift responding and reinforcement learning from
worse-than-expected reinforcements.  We have previously shown that
lose-shift is attenuated by acute administration of amphetamine, which
increases striatal dopamine among other eﬀects [26].  We expected that
THC would have a similar attenuating eﬀect on lose-shift due to reduction of negative RPE.  Furthermore, we expect that THC would impair reinforcement learning from reward omission for the same reason. 
Learning from positive reinforcements, however, should remain intactTo test this hypothesis, we systemically injected rats with THC and
analyzed speciﬁc features of reinforcement-driven response adaptation
in two reward-based decision-making tasks.  The ﬁrst was a binary
choice task that rewards random choice; rats nonetheless employ a winstay/lose-shift strategy [33].  The second was an uncued reversal task
that can be solved using reinforcement learning.  These tasks allow us to
diﬀerentiate between the potential eﬀects of drug on lose-shift responding that occurs on a trial-by-trial basis, and on the multi-trial
learning required to track reversals of asymmetric reward probabilities. 
We found that systemic THC administration attenuated lose-shift responding on both tasks.  However, the drug did not impair the ability to
ﬂexibly reverse choice preference in response to uncued reversals of
reward probability.  These results suggest that THC causes an apparent
reduction in cognitive ﬂexibility by impairing trial-by-trial loss sensitivity while sparing slower multi-trial learning from wins.  This dissociation is supported by recent computational analyses of rodent and
human choices in decision-making tasks, which have demonstrated that
hybrid models with rapid and gradual components more accurately
capture the choices of humans and rodents than do models with a
unitary timeframe [34–37]. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  Animals
Subjects were 21 adult (90 days old) female Long-Evans rats (bred
in-house) weighing 200–250 g.  Animals were pair-housed in a climatecontrolled vivarium under a 12:12 h light:dark cycle (lights on 7:30
a. m. ).  Animals had restricted access to water (one hour) on behavioural
testing days, but otherwise had ad libitum access to food and water.  All
procedures were approved by the University of Lethbridge Animal
Welfare Committee (AWC) in accordance with the guidelines of the
Canadian Council on Animal Care.  Our utilization of female rats ﬁlls
knowledge gaps and is encouraged by the AWC. 
2. 2.  Behaviour apparatus
Behavioural testing was performed in aluminum operant conditioning chambers (see Fig.  1) as described previously [33,36].  Brieﬂy,
rats were placed in the operant conditioning chamber for 45 min sessions.  Trials were self-paced, and initiated by the rat performing a nosepoke into the central port.  Following 150 ms of nose-poke entry, a toneFig.  1.  Schematic diagram of the operant conditioning chamber used for behavioural(6 kHz) was presented to indicate that the animal could then locomote
to one of the two adjacent sucrose delivery feeders.  If the correct feeder
was chosen, a reward (60 μL of 10% sucrose solution) was delivered.  If
the incorrect feeder was chosen, no sucrose was delivered, the houselight illuminated, and the two panel lights extinguished.  The state of the
lights then reverted (house-light turned oﬀ; panel light turned on).  This
change in lighting served to indicate that reward was not forthcoming,
and was of suﬃciently short duration such that it terminated by the
time the rats returned to the central poke port; there was therefore no
‘time-out’ associated with reward omission.  Once a feeder was chosen,
or if no feeder was chosen in the 15 s following a nose-poke, the trial
ended and the rat had to return to the central port to initiate a new trial. 
2. 3.  Experiment 1: acute eﬀects of THC on the Competitive Choice TaskThe behaviour of animals in the ﬁrst cohort (n = 10) was shaped
during the ﬁrst two training sessions.  All trials were rewarded and no
barriers were present in the ﬁrst training session to facilitate task acquisition.  In the second training session, rats were rewarded on 50% of
the trials regardless of feeder choice.  In all subsequent sessions, reinforcement was controlled by an algorithm that attempted to minimize
the number of rewards given to the rats by predicting which feeder the
rat would select.  This was done by examining the choices and reinforcements from the previous four trials [20,36].  If either feeder was
selected at a greater than chance rate in the context of these past trials,
it would be unrewarded for the upcoming trial.  In doing so, the competitive mode implements the classic ‘Matching Pennies’ task.  Optimal
performance (random responding) will result in reward on 50% of the
trials.  Parallel barriers positioned between the central port and feeder
wells were added to introduce a choice cost and discourage feeder bias
due to body position.  Increasingly longer barriers (4. 0, 8. 5, 13. 5 cm)
were introduced during consecutive days of training.  Rats were trained
until they completed two consecutive sessions of at least 150 trials with
the long barriers.  All subsequent training and testing sessions were run
with the long barriers. 
After initial shaping (9 daily sessions), animals were randomly divided into four groups to receive acute THC (Cayman Chemicals, Ann
Arbour, MI) in a counterbalanced block design.  The drug was dissolved
into a 1:1:1:16 solution of THC:ethanol:Cremaphor EL:sterile saline
(0. 9%) and delivered by intraperitoneal (IP) injection at one of three
dosages (0. 5 mg/kg, 1. 0 mg/kg, or 2. 0 mg/kg).  Injections were administered 30 min prior to testing on the behavioural task over a period
of 8 days using the following schedule: vehicle, injection 1, no injection, injection 2, no injection, injection 3, no injection, and injection 4. 
The initial vehicle injection served to habituate animals to the
S. A.  Wong Name
procedure and was not included in the analysis.  Injection days consisted
of one of the three THC dosages or vehicle.  Injecting drug or vehicle
every other day provided time for THC to metabolize between sessions
in order to reduce the potential confound of extended drug eﬀects [38]. 
Running the rats on the task with no treatment every other day also
provided an opportunity to ‘wash-out’ any learned choice strategy
during the drug sessions. 
2. 4.  Experiment 2: acute eﬀects of THC on the reversal task
An additional cohort of female rats (n = 11) performed a reversal
learning task in the same operant conditioning chambers.  Animals were
trained on the same schedule as cohort 1.  Trial initiation was self-paced
and began with a nose-poke in the central port.  A non-informative tone
then prompted the rat to select a sucrose delivery feeder.  Correct feeder
choices were rewarded with sucrose solution.  No reward was given for
incorrect choices.  In contrast to the Competitive Choice Task, the
probability of receiving a reward at a particular feeder was ﬁxed over
blocks of 60 trials to either a high or low reward probability.  These
reward probabilities reversed at the beginning of each block of trials. 
For example, the left feeder would be the high reward probability side
on trials 1–60, and would then reverse to become the low reward
probability side for trials 61–120.  The reversals repeated several times
per session, and the initial location of high-probability feeder was assigned randomly each session.  Animals were trained on this task for six
sessions, with the high/low reward probability increasing every two
sessions from 0. 6/0. 4 to 0. 7/0. 3, and ﬁnally to 0. 8/0. 2. 
Animals were then randomly divided into two equal groups and
received either THC (2. 0 mk/kg) or vehicle 30 min before testing in a
counterbalanced design with reward probabilities for testing sessions
set at 0. 8/0. 2.  The injection schedule across sessions was as follows:
vehicle, no injection, injection 1, no injection, injection 2.  The initial
injection of vehicle was to habituate animals to the process and was not
included in the analysis. 
2. 5.  Behaviour analysis
Data were analyzed using Matlab version 2013a (Mathworks,
Massachusetts), Graphpad Prism version 6 (Graphpad, La Jolla, CA),
and SPSS version 21 (IBM, North Castle, NY).  To minimize potential
confounds, all trials in which the animal sampled both feeders on the
previous trial, which we have previously termed impulsive feeder approach [26], were omitted from the analysis of lose-shift and win-stay
probabilities.  For Experiment 1 (Acute eﬀects of THC on the Competitive Choice Task), we examined several features of responding including lose-shift, win-stay, reaction time (duration of nose-poke in
central port), number of trials, response time (time to locomote from
central port to reward feeder), response entropy, intertrial interval, and
impulsive feeder approach.  Lose-shift responding is a measure of loss
sensitivity wherein animals chose to shift feeder choice from that of the
previous trial if they failed to receive reward.  Win-stay is the re-selection of the feeder on the current trial that provided a reward on the
previous trial.  Response entropy is a measure of the randomness of an
animal’s choice sequence [36], with higher values representing more
unpredictable responses.  This was determined by calculating the
Shannon entropy of the animal’s choice sequence binned into four
consecutive trials [39].  This resulted in nearly random feeder selection
having entropy approaching four bits, while any pattern in feeder
choice or side bias resulted in a lower value.  Note that response entropy
is only weakly related to win-stay and lose-shift responses because the
competitive algorithm randomizes the rewarded side on a trial-by-trial
basis when the rat is performing well. 