
The term pessimism (pessimistic judgement bias) refers to a ﬁxation
on the darker aspects of a situation or event, to the expectation of a
negative outcome, or to a lack of hope for the future [1,2].  Those who
tend towards pessimism may also feel helpless and believe that any
actions taken are unlikely to have an impact on their future.  The role of
pessimism has been emphasized in the aetiology of aﬀective disorders. 
In cognitive theories, information processing biases, including pessimistic judgement bias, are considered as a vulnerability factor for the
aetiology, maintenance and recurrence of depression [3–6].  This vulnerability has been conceptualized as a trait-like latent endogenous
process reactive to the eﬀects of stress, which reside in genetic, biological, and psychological variables [7].  However, to date, there have
been very few studies that directly support this theoretical claim.  Recent development of the ACI test, a task that can be used to measure
cognitive judgement bias (‘optimism’ and ‘pessimism’) in animals
[8–10], enabled the investigation of cognitive vulnerability to depression in an animal model. 
In our research, we assumed that in animals, similar to the case in
humans, cognitive judgement bias has components of both an enduring
trait and a transient state [11].  A trait represents a stable individual
diﬀerence in the level of pessimism/optimism that is generally experienced, whereas the state includes the pessimism/optimism that may
change on the basis of the situation or contextual factors.  Following this
assumption and on the basis of a number of ACI tests, we are now able
to isolate two groups of animals that signiﬁcantly and persistently diﬀer
in their cognitive judgement bias index over time.  In other words, we
are able to identify animals displaying stable and enduring ‘pessimistic’
and ‘optimistic’ traits. 
Recent research conducted in our laboratory revealed that the trait
‘pessimism’ in rats is linked with higher vulnerability to stress-induced
anhedonia [12].  We also demonstrated that ‘pessimistic’ rats are more
sensitive to negative performance feedback in the probabilistic reversallearning task [13] and less motivated to work for a reward in a progressive ratio schedule of reinforcement [14].  Other studies revealed
the interrelation between the traits ‘pessimism’ and ‘optimism’ and
risky decision making in an animal model of slot machine gambling
where rats classiﬁed as ‘optimists’ were more likely to gamble for a
reward on clearly losing outcomes than were the ‘pessimists’ [15]. 
Another study, which assessed the inﬂuence of cognitive judgement
bias on decision-making under uncertainty, reported that ‘pessimistic’
⁎ Corresponding author. 