Article
Genetic and Epigenetic Strategies Potentiate Gal4
Activation to Enhance Fitness in Recently Diverged
Yeast Species
Highlights
d GAL epigenetic transcriptional memory promotes fasterVarun Sood, Jason H.  Brickner
reactivation of GAL genes
d Previously produced Gal1 provides a large future ﬁtness
beneﬁt in galactose
d Epigenetic GAL memory most likely evolved from genetically
encoded priming
d The Gal4 central domain promotes both Gal80 repression and
maximal activation
Correspondence
j-brickner@northwestern. edu
In Brief
Sood and Brickner ﬁnd that faster GAL
gene induction during transcriptional
memory accelerates adaptation to
galactose and requires both previously
produced Gal1 to relieve Gal80
repression and the Gal4 central domain,
which potentiates stronger activation. 
Related yeasts use either genetic or
epigenetic means to alter GAL gene
activation rates. 
Sood & Brickner, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3591–3602
December 4, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 035
Current BiologyGenetic and Epigenetic Strategies
Potentiate Gal4 Activation to Enhance
Fitness in Recently Diverged Yeast Species
Varun Sood1 and Jason H.  Brickner1,2,*
1Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
2Lead Contact
*Correspondence: j-brickner@northwestern. edu
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 035Certain genes show more rapid reactivation for
several generations following repression, a conserved
phenomenon called epigenetic transcriptional memory.  Following previous growth in galactose, GAL
gene transcriptional memory confers a strong ﬁtness
beneﬁt in Saccharomyces cerevisiae adapting to
growth in galactose for up to 8 generations.  A genetic
screen for mutants defective for GAL gene memory revealed new insights into the molecular mechanism,
adaptive consequences, and evolutionary history of
memory.  A point mutation in the Gal1 co-activator
that disrupts the interaction with the Gal80 inhibitor
speciﬁcally and completely disrupted memory.  This
mutation conﬁrms that cytoplasmically inherited
Gal1 produced during previous growth in galactose
directly interferes with Gal80 repression to promote
faster induction of GAL genes.  This mitotically heritable mode of regulation is recently evolved;diverged Saccharomyces species, GAL genes show
constitutively faster activation due to genetically
encoded basal expression of Gal1.  Thus, recently
diverged species utilize either epigenetic or genetic
strategies to regulate the same molecular mechanism.  The screen also revealed that the central
domain of the Gal4 transcription factor both regulates
the stochasticity of GAL gene expression and potentiates stronger GAL gene activation in the presence
of Gal1.  The central domain is critical for GAL gene
transcriptional memory; Gal4 lacking the central
domain fails to potentiate GAL gene expression and
is unresponsive to previous Gal1 expression. 
INTRODUCTION
Transcriptional adaptation to ﬂuctuations in nutrient availability is
critical for ﬁtness [1].  In response to previous experiences,
certain inducible genes show a mitotically heritable increase in
the rate of transcription [2–12].  This epigenetic phenomenon,
referred as transcriptional memory,
is observed in yeast,
Drosophila, and humans [5, 7, 13].  However, its evolutionary
history and adaptive impact have not been explored.  Also,
whereas some aspects of transcriptional memory are deeply
conserved, gene-speciﬁc features also occur [4, 6, 8, 14], suggesting that gene-speciﬁc regulatory systems can be regulated
by transcriptional memory. 
In S.  cerevisiae, GAL genes exhibit transcriptional memory. 
These genes are speciﬁcally induced in galactose to mediate
galactose utilization [15, 16].  When cells are shifted from glucose
to galactose, the initial rate of induction of GAL genes is very
slow; the Gal1 protein reaches steady-state levels 10 hr after
shifting from glucose to galactose (Figure 1B; compared with
the doubling time of budding yeast, 1. 5–2 hr).  However, in cells
that have been previously grown in galactose, GAL genes are
rapidly reactivated.  This phenomenon persists in the population
for 7 or 8 cell divisions after repression in glucose [2, 11, 14, 17]. 
Like other genes that show memory, GAL transcriptional
memory is also associated with changes in chromatin structure,
leading to a state that is poised for faster reactivation [14]. 
The initial induction of GAL genes is slow in part because, in
most cells, there are fewer molecules of the Gal3 co-activator
than the Gal80 inhibitor [11, 18].  Consequently, the expression
is initially heterogeneous, with some cells responding and others
not [18].  On the other hand, during memory, reactivation is more
uniform [18].  GAL memory requires the Gal1 galactokinase, a
paralog of Gal3 [2, 11, 14, 17].  Gal1 is abundantly produced in
galactose, extremely stable, and diluted very slowly after repression in glucose [14].  A few hundred molecules of Gal1 are necessary and sufﬁcient to produce the effects of memory, including
the changes in chromatin structure over the GAL1 promoter
and uniformity of expression [11, 14].  Because both Gal1 and
Gal3 can interact with Gal80 to relieve inhibition of the Gal4 activator [19–23], this leads to a model whereby residual Gal1 allows
cells to more rapidly overcome Gal80 repression and rapidly
induce GAL genes during memory (Figure 1A). 
Here, we explored the adaptive value, evolutionary history,
and molecular mechanism of GAL gene transcriptional memory. 
In S.  cerevisiae, GAL transcriptional memory confers a strong
adaptive advantage, allowing much faster adaptation to
galactose and better utilization of mixed sugars.  In contrast,
S.  uvarum, a divergent Saccharomyces species, does not beneﬁt
from previous growth in galactose but instead shows constitutively fast GAL gene activation due to basal GAL1 expression. 
Replacing the GAL1 promoter in S.  cerevisiae with that from
S.  uvarum recapitulated this difference in behavior, conﬁrming
that the basal expression of Gal1 and the resulting fast activation
Current Biology 27, 3591–3602, December 4, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd.  3591
Figure 1.  Expression Changes during GAL Memory and Their Fitness Effect
For a Figure360 author presentation of Figure 1, see the ﬁgure legend at https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 10. 035. 
(A) Model for GAL1 regulation and memory.  Top: during activation, Gal3 sequesters the Gal80 repressor from the Gal4 activator, leading to GAL gene expression. 
Bottom: during reactivation, residual Gal1 augments Gal3 co-activation, leading to faster expression kinetics. 
(B–G) Naive cells (ACT), naive cells expressing ectopic Gal1 (ACT + eGAL1), or cells that were grown in galactose overnight and shifted to glucose for 12 hr
(REACT) were shifted to media containing galactose and either GAL1-mCherry ﬂuorescence (B–D and F) or optical density 600 (OD600) (E and G) were measured. 
GAL1-mCherry ﬂuorescence was measured relative to constitutively expressed CFP using ﬂow cytometry.  (C and D) Effect of Gal80 inhibition on Gal1-mCherry
expression.  (D) Overlay of histograms for Gal1-mCherry from corresponding strains at the indicated times in (B) and (C).  (E) At time = 0, all cultures were diluted to
an OD600 of 0. 1 in galactose, and OD600 was measured every 20 min using 96-well plate reader.  Open circles represent the ratio of OD600 between REACT and
ACT.  (F) Gal1-mCherry levels relative to CFP control after 7 hr in different concentration of galactose, plotted as fraction of expression in 1% galactose.  (G) Growth
and Gal1-mCherry expression (inset) in 0. 2% glucose + 1. 8% galactose.  *p % 0. 05; Student’s t test. 
Error bars for Gal1mCherry ﬂuorescence represent SEM from R3 biological replicates.  The line and the bounding envelope for the OD600 measurements are the
mean and SEM, respectively, from R5 biological replicates.  The yeast strains and the number of biological replicates for all experiments are listed in Tables S1
and S2, respectively. 
of other GAL genes are genetically encoded by this promoter. 
Using a point mutation in Gal1 that disrupts the interaction with
Gal80, we demonstrate that fast induction of GAL genes in
both species results from a physical interaction between Gal1
and Gal80.  A screen for mutants that block GAL memory downstream of Gal1 identiﬁed a mutation in Gal4 central domain (CD),
revealing a critical role for this domain in transcriptional memory
downstream of both Gal1 and Gal80.  The CD serves to potentiate Gal4 activation, and this function is regulated by Gal80. 
Ectopically expressed CD complemented deletion of the CD in
trans and was recruited to chromatin-bound Gal4Dcd, suggesting that potentiation is the result of an inter-domain interaction
within Gal4.  Thus, recently diverged species employ either
3592 Current Biology 27, 3591–3602, December 4, 2017
epigenetic or genetic strategies to alter the transcriptional
potency of a transcription factor, promoting faster adaptation
to changes in carbon source. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Transcriptional Memory Enhances Fitness by Promoting
Uniform, Rapid Activation of GAL Genes
Because Gal1 is both necessary and sufﬁcient to promote faster
induction of GAL genes during memory, Gal1 most likely interacts with Gal80 to allow rapid de-repression of GAL genes
(Figure 1A).  The relative rates of GAL1 transcription can be
compared by measuring Gal1-mCherry ﬂuorescence expressed
Figure 2.  Genetic Screen for Mutants Defective for GAL Memory Identiﬁes gal1-D117V
(A) Schematic of the 2-step FACS-based screen (see STAR Methods for details). 
(B) Gal1-mCherry intensity relative to CFP internal control in wild-type and gal1-D117V mutant, measured by ﬂow cytometry.  Cells were shifted from glucose to
galactose for activation (ACT) or grown in galactose overnight, shifted to glucose for 12 hr, and then shifted to galactose for reactivation (REACT).  Error bar
represents SEM from R4 biological replicates. 