Article
Neuropeptide Y Regulates Sleep by Modulating
Noradrenergic Signaling
Highlights
d A genetic screen in zebraﬁsh shows that overexpression of
NPY promotes sleepChanpreet Singh, Jason Rihel,
David A.  Prober
d Mutation of npy or ablation of npy-expressing neurons results
in decreased sleep
Correspondence
dprober@caltech. edu
d NPY regulates sleep primarily by modulating the length of
wake bouts
d NPY promotes sleep by inhibiting noradrenergic signaling
In Brief
Based on a genetic screen, Singh Name
identify NPY signaling and npyexpressing neurons as regulators of
zebraﬁsh sleep.  They show that NPY
promotes sleep by inhibiting
noradrenergic signaling, thus linking NPY
signaling to an established arousalpromoting system. 
Singh Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3796–3811
December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 018
Current BiologyNeuropeptide Y Regulates Sleep
by Modulating Noradrenergic Signaling
Chanpreet Singh,1 Jason Rihel,2 and David A.  Prober1,3,*
1Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
2Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK
3Lead Contact
*Correspondence: dprober@caltech. edu
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 018Sleep is an essential and evolutionarily conserved
behavioral state whose regulation remains poorly understood.  To identify genes that regulate vertebrate
sleep, we recently performed a genetic screen in
zebraﬁsh, and here we report the identiﬁcation of
neuropeptide Y (NPY) as both necessary for normal
daytime sleep duration and sufﬁcient to promote
sleep.  We show that overexpression of NPY increases sleep, whereas mutation of npy or ablation
of npy-expressing neurons decreases sleep.  By
analyzing sleep architecture, we show that NPY
regulates sleep primarily by modulating the length
of wake bouts.  To determine how NPY regulates
sleep, we tested for
interactions with several
systems known to regulate sleep, and provide
anatomical, molecular, genetic, and pharmacological evidence that NPY promotes sleep by inhibiting
noradrenergic signaling.  These data establish NPY
as an important vertebrate sleep/wake regulator
and link NPY signaling to an established arousal-promoting system. 
INTRODUCTION
Sleep is among the most basic needs of living organisms, yet
mechanisms that regulate sleep remain poorly understood. 