
Cognitive control includes the capacity to enhance the activation of
task-relevant processes while suppressing distracting ones. Stroop paradigm [1], a typical cognitive control task, one has to name
the font color of words and ignore their meaning.  Color naming time
and errors increase when the word color and meaning are incongruent
(e. g. , BLUE written in red) relative to when they are congruent (e. g. ,
BLUE written in blue) or neutral (e. g. , BLUE written in black).  Classical
explanations suggest that, to combat interference during incongruent
conditions, cognitive control processes suppress a habitual reading
mode and activate controlled color naming [2,3]. 
Cognitive control requires the complementary activation of the
anterior cingulate and lateral prefrontal cortex, as demonstrated in
functional neuroimaging studies [4,5].  Speciﬁcally, verbal Stroop-related activations have been observed in the dorso- and ventro-lateral
prefrontal cortex, predominantly in the left hemisphere (e. g. , [6,7]; also
see Ref.  [8], for a recent example of converging neuropsychological
evidence of a left prefrontal involvement in verbal Stroop).  Thus, based
on functional neuroimaging (and neuropsychological) data, one could
hypothesize that a leftward hemispheric asymmetry in the lateral prefrontal cortex helps to combat Stroop interference.  However, left and
right hemispheric activations are not usually compared through direct
statistical tests.  Moreover, a diﬀerent scenario seems to emerge with
structural neuroimaging evidence.  In a recent voxel-based morphometry study, it was found that regional grey matter volume in the
anterior cingulate cortex, cerebellum and, importantly, right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex was negatively related to the amount of verbal
Stroop interference [9].  Thus, if structural MRI data are taken into
consideration, one could posit diverging expectations regarding which
direction of frontal asymmetry supports better Stroop performance. 
Another region that may be involved in verbal Stroop performance
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Neuroscience, University of Padova, Via Giustiniani, 5, 35128 Padova, Italy. 
E-mail address: antonino. vallesi@unipd. it (A.  Vallesi). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 024
Received 23 May 2017; Received in revised form 13 July 2017; Accepted 14 August 2017
Available online 20 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
A.  Vallesi Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 167–173
is the so-called Visual Word Form Area (VWFA), a word-sensitive region
located in the left inferior posterior temporal cortex [10,11].  Evidence
from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies shows that
activity in the VWFA and Broca's area is modulated by Stroop interference (e. g. , [12]).  Another fMRI study also found diﬀerential activity
in a region proximal to the VWFA in the incongruent vs.  congruent
contrast for a verbal Stroop version but not for a spatial one [13]. 
Collectively, these works corroborate the hypothesis that the VWFA
integrates feed-forward visual processing with top-down inﬂuences
from more anterior areas controlling phonological and semantic processing during written word recognition [14].  The fact that this region
is speciﬁcally involved in the Stroop eﬀect in some studies [12,13],
however, suggests that it could also be more speciﬁcally involved in
cognitive conﬂict resolution, at least for verbal material.  According to a
recent magnetoencephalography study [15], the VWFA is recruited not
only early on for lower-level word processing [16], but also at later
stages for gating lexico-semantic processing (see also Refs.  [17–19]),
arguably the stage where interference occurs in word-color Stroop incongruency. 
The present study aimed to understand whether grey matter structural characteristics in healthy young participants could explain individual diﬀerences in Stroop performance in regions previously found
to be functionally involved in Stroop interference, including the left
lateral prefrontal cortex (e. g. , Broca’s area) and the VWFA.  This goal
was achieved by assessing complementary surface-based measures of
grey matter structure, in particular, cortical thickness and surface area. 
Since relationships between cortical structure and function are still
unclear (e. g. , [20]) and in order to minimize the risk of diluting subtle
regional diﬀerences, we opted for a whole-brain approach instead of
selectively analyzing a priori deﬁned brain regions.  Moreover, given the
strong left lateralization obtained in fMRI studies of verbal Stroop tasks,
we particularly focused on (left vs.  right) brain asymmetries as a possible ﬁne-grained way to explain inter-individual diﬀerences (cf. , [21])
in the performance on this cognitive control task. 
To our knowledge, there is only one recent study [22] that investigated the relationship between structural brain asymmetries and
performance on a Stroop task.  By using voxel-based morphometry, it
was found that a leftward asymmetry in the thalamus was associated
with better performance on a paper-and-pencil version of the Stroop
test, at least in male participants.  However, that study examined a
heterogeneous sample of older adults (mean age: 65. 2 ± 8. 0 years). 
Thus, its results cannot be easily generalized to a healthier and younger
population. 
We additionally employed a spatial version of the Stroop paradigm
(e. g. , [23]) as a “control” task.  The spatial Stroop task could however be
interesting in and of itself.  On the one hand, an association between left
lateralization and the spatial Stroop eﬀect may be predicted as a beneﬁcial role of leftward intrinsic functional lateralization in the middle
frontal gyrus, assessed with resting state electroencephalography
(EEG), has been shown for both the verbal and spatial Stroop eﬀects
[24].  On the other hand, one could envisage mirrored patterns for the
verbal and spatial tasks based on recent neuropsychological literature
showing that the lateralization of prefrontal regions critical for the
performance of conﬂict tasks is domain-dependent [25].  Speciﬁcally, an
increased verbal Stroop eﬀect resulted after left ventro-lateral prefrontal lesions, while the performance on a spatial conﬂict task (i. 