
Several studies suggest that inhibition diﬃculties among people with ASD might be related to atypical cardiac
vagal control.  We examined how low versus high baseline heart rate variability (HRV) inﬂuences prepotent
response inhibition in 31 males with autism spectrum disorder (ASD; mean age: 32. 2; mean IQ: 107. 8) compared
to 39 typically developing (TD) males (mean age: 30. 5; mean IQ: 102. 0) by administering a stop signal task. 
Moreover, we examined whether adding an aﬀective manipulation would alter ﬁndings and whether this manipulation aﬀected HRV.  Findings indicated that baseline HRV inﬂuenced inhibition in ASD males.  Speciﬁcally,
an ASD subgroup with low baseline HRV performed signiﬁcantly worse compared to an ASD subgroup with high
baseline HRV.  No inﬂuence of baseline HRV was found in TD males.  The aﬀective manipulation did negatively
inﬂuence performance and also altered HRV.  Although replication is required, these ﬁrst ﬁndings indicate that
baseline cardiac vagal control seems to aﬀect inhibitory control in males with ASD. resistanceresponse
inhibition
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental disorders, characterized by social interaction and communication diﬃculties as well as repetitive behaviors (APA, 2013).  Both repetitive
behaviors and social interaction diﬃculties have been theorized to be
related to inhibitory control deﬁciencies (e. g. , Bachevalier & Loveland,
2006; Hill, 2004; Mosconi Name, 2009; Russel, 1997).  Three types of
inhibitory control can be identiﬁed, namely interference control, prepotent
interference
(Friedman & Miyake, 2004).  Prepotent response inhibition and interference control are the two most studied types of inhibition in the ASD
population.  Prepotent response inhibition is the ability to suppress or
withhold a (motor) response.  Interference control is the ability to ignore
irrelevant stimuli.  Although recent meta-analyses conﬁrm that people
with ASD have more prepotent response inhibition (Cohen’s d = 0. 55;
Hedges’g = 0. 51) and interference control (Cohen’s d = 0. 31) diﬃculties than typically developing (TD) individuals, both meta-analyses
also found a large amount of heterogeneity (Geurts, van den
Bergh & Ruzzano, 2014; Kuiper, Verhoeven & Geurts, 2016).  This means
that the ﬁndings across studies were inconsistent. 
This large amount of heterogeneity between inhibitory control
study ﬁndings in people with ASD suggests that there are other factors
that inﬂuence these ﬁndings.  In the two aforementioned meta-analyses,
we examined several possible factors, namely the possible inﬂuence of
age, intelligence (IQ), interstimulus interval (ISI) and ‘stimulus type’
(Geurts Name, 2014; Kuiper Name, 2016).  In the ﬁrst meta-analysis, age
explained 25% of the heterogeneity between the studies on prepotent
response inhibition, but a signiﬁcant amount of heterogeneity still remained.  Age was not a relevant moderator for interference control.  IQ
showed the opposite pattern as it had no eﬀect on prepotent response
inhibition, but did explain 62% of the heterogeneity between the interference control studies (Geurts Name, 2014).  In the second metaanalysis, which solely focused on prepotent response inhibition, the
possible inﬂuence of variations in ISI and ‘stimulus type’ as well as the
factors age and IQ were examined (Kuiper Name, 2016).  Age, IQ and ISI
did not signiﬁcantly reduce the heterogeneity between the studies.  The
inﬂuence of ‘stimulus type’ was systematically reviewed and showed
mixed results.  It seemed to depend on the type of stimulus whether or
not it inﬂuenced inhibition.  We hypothesized that perhaps the stimulus
types have diﬀerent physiological eﬀects and that more studies were
needed that include two diﬀerent sets of stimuli as well as physiological
measures to be able to directly measure the (physiological) inﬂuence of
a stimulus type on inhibitory control in people with ASD.  The reason
behind why there was a non-signiﬁcant eﬀect of age found in the
second meta-analysis (Kuiper Name, 2016) compared to the signiﬁcant
⁎ Corresponding author at: Dr.  Leo Kannerhuis, Houtsniplaan 1, 6865 XZ Doorwerth, The Netherlands. 
E-mail addresses: kuiper. marieke@gmail. com, m. kuiper@leokannerhuis. nl (M. W. M.  Kuiper). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 006
Received 14 November 2016; Received in revised form 10 July 2017; Accepted 11 July 2017
Available online 15 July 2017
0301-0511/ 
M. W. M.  Kuiper Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 141–152
eﬀect in the ﬁrst meta-analysis (Geurts Name, 2014), was suggested to
be related to the smaller percentage of studies focusing on adults with
ASD, as this was 18. 9% and 26. 1% respectively.  Taken together, this
shows that there are other factors than age, IQ, and ISI that inﬂuence
inhibition in people with ASD.  Several authors have hypothesized that
cardiac vagal control might be one of these factors (e. g. , Geurts,
Begeer, & Stockmann,Kindt, & Forstmann, 2011; Raymaekers, van der Meere, & Roeyers,
2004; Raymaekers, van der Meere, & Roeyers, 2006; Raymaekers,
Antrop, van der Meere, Wiersema, & Roeyers, 2007). 
Krypotos,Jahfari,Cardiac vagal control refers to the degree of tonic vagal inﬂuences
on the heart.  The beat-to-beat heart rate (HR) of humans varies considerably (e. g. , Billman, 2011; Stein, Bosner, Kleiger, & Conger, 1994). 
This variation in time between heart beats is mostly caused by brain
stem projections
to the heart via the vagus nerve (Berntson,
Cacioppo, & Quigley, 1993).  Vagus nerve activity is also related to the
respiratory cycle (e. g. , Berntson Name, 1997).  During inhalation, HR
accelerates and vagal activity is decreased, and during exhalation HR
slows down and vagal activity is restored.  Cardiac vagal control is indexed by respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA) or high frequency HRV,
which both refer to HRV during spontaneous breathing (e. g. , Berntson
Name, 1997).  There are several theoretical models that argue the importance of cardiac vagal control in relation to (social) behavior.  Two
commonly reported models are the Neurovisceral Integration Model
(e. g. , Thayer & Lane, 2000; Thayer & Friedman, 2002; Friedman, 2007)
and the Polyvagal Theory (e. g. , Porges, 2001, 2007; Porges Name,The Neurovisceral Integration Model states that a core set of neural
structures (emphasizing the role of the amygdala and the medial prefrontal cortex) integrates signals from inside and outside the body to
assess whether the physiological state of the body, cognition, perception and action match the environmental demands (e. g. , Thayer & Lane,
2000; Thayer, Ahs, Fredrikson, Sollers 3rd, & Wager, 2012).  These
neural structures are suggested to form a system that continuously assesses whether the environment is safe or unsafe, which is needed to
prepare the body for the appropriate response.  The model describes a
central autonomic network (CAN) that has bidirectional pathways to
the sinoatrial node of the heart.  Through the CAN, the brain would
control responses on a visceromotor, neuroendocrine and behavioral
level that are crucial
for adaptability and goal-directed behavior
(Benarroch, 1993).  Both sympathetic and parasympathetic preganglionic neurons would mediate the primary output of the CAN at the
sinoatrial node of the heart via the vagus nerve.  The output of the CAN
would produce HRV (Thayer & Lane, 2000).  In their paper, Thayer and
Lane (2000) argue that HRV is not only related to physiological ﬂexibility and attentional regulation but also to aﬀective information
processing.  People with low HRV would be less able to detect and experience safety (even when it is present) and would also have diﬃculty
with aﬀective information processing.  Taken together, in this model,
HRV is seen as an index for health and adaptability. 
Besides this model, the Polyvagal Theory (Porges, 2001) explains
the relationship between cardiac vagal control and social behavior from
an evolutionary and hierarchical perspective.  Brieﬂy, in this theory, the
nervous system regulates both bodily and behavioral states (Porges,
2001).  This is partially realized by the function of the myelinated vagus
nerve as a vagal “brake” (Porges, 2001, 2007).  The “brake” would aﬀect
the sympathetic inﬂuences on the heart by either inhibiting vagal tone
(supporting mobilization) or disinhibiting vagal tone (promoting calm
and social behavior).  Speciﬁc brain areas, such as the temporal cortex,
would determine whether the surroundings require physiological states
that either encourage social behavior or ﬁght-ﬂight behavior (Porges,
2007).  Individual diﬀerences in this process are suggested to mediate
emotion regulation and expression.  The theory argues that the impact
of the myelinated vagus nerve on the heart can be measured with the
quantiﬁcation of RSA.  Porges (2001, 2007) argues that lower RSA
mobilizes ﬁght-ﬂight behaviors, while higher RSA supports socialengaging behaviors and emotional regulation. 
Besides these two theoretical models, ﬁndings from several studies
seem to conﬁrm the hypothesis that variations in HRV are related to
diﬀerences in behavior (e. g. , Appelhans & Luecken, 2006; Katahira,
Fujimura, Matsuda, Okanoya, & Okada, 2014) as well as to several
psychiatric disorders (e. g. , Thayer & Lane, 2000).  For instance, reductions in HRV are shown to be related to depression (Thayer & Lane,
2000), generalized anxiety disorder, and behavioral
inﬂexibility
(Friedman & Thayer, 1998a, 1998b).  Taken together, higher HRV seems
to be associated with health, emotion regulation and better adjustment
to environmental demands, while lower HRV would be associated with
disease, ﬁght-ﬂight behaviors and social diﬃculties (Thayer & Lane,
2000; Friedman 2007; Thayer Name, 2012; Porges, 2001; Porges Name,Recent studies suggest there might be a subgroup within the ASD
population that is characterized by low HRV.  In a review on cardiac
autonomic regulation in ASD, Klusek, Roberts, and Losh (2015) reported several studies that showed that children with ASD had signiﬁcantly decreased HRV compared to TD individuals during cognitive
tasks.  Interestingly, it was discovered that these children with ASD also
had decreased HRV at baseline.  Moreover, studies that found no differences between the ASD and TD group in HRV during a cognitive task,
did not ﬁnd diﬀerences in HRV at baseline either (Klusek Name, 2015). 
The authors concluded that a subgroup of the ASD population has
chronically lowered HRV (Klusek Name, 2015).  Therefore, the level of
baseline HRV might be of greater importance than thought until now. 
Especially, since in the general population the inﬂuence of baseline
HRV on cognitive performance has been shown as well.  Krypotos Name
(2011) used a median split on baseline HRV to create a low and high
baseline subgroup.  These subgroups then performed an emotional
prepotent response inhibition task.  The results showed that,
independent of subgroup, negative valence highly arousing pictures lead
to more inhibitory control diﬃculties.  This is in line with previous
studies (e. g. , Verbruggen & De Houwer, 2007), which showed that
being confronted with highly arousing emotional pictures will lead to
slower stopping-responses (i. e. , more diﬃculty inhibiting a response). 
Moreover, the subgroup with low baseline HRV performed signiﬁcantly
worse on the task compared to the high baseline HRV subgroup when
confronted with these negative valence highly arousing pictures
(Krypotos Name, 2011).  This suggests that if one’s baseline HRV is low,
being confronted with negative emotions will lead to more prepotent
response inhibition diﬃculties.  Perhaps the inconsistencies in ﬁndings
between studies on prepotent response inhibition in the ASD population
(Geurts Name, 2014; Kuiper Name, 2016) can be explained by the existence of diﬀerent subgroups that are characterized by diﬀerent baseline HRV levels.  Speciﬁcally, it is plausible that there is a subgroup
within the ASD population that is characterized by low baseline HRV. 
Negative valence highly arousing stimuli would lead to even more inhibitory control diﬃculties in this subgroup. 
The aim of the present study was threefold.  First, we aimed to examine whether low versus high baseline HRV inﬂuenced prepotent
response inhibition in adults with ASD.  Second, we aimed to examine
whether this possible inﬂuence of low versus high baseline HRV might
be diﬀerent for adults with ASD compared to TD adults.  Third, we
aimed to examine whether adding negative valence highly arousing
stimuli would aﬀect inhibitory control diﬀerently for people with and
without ASD as well as for subgroups with diﬀerent baseline HRV levels.  In line with previous relevant studies (e. g. , Krypotos Name 2011),
we were divided the ASD and TD group into subgroups based on
baseline HRV using a median split.  The inhibition task consisted of two
conditions: a neutral condition and a condition with a negative aﬀective
manipulation.  In addition to Krypotos Name (2011), we examined both
subjectively and physiologically whether the negative aﬀective manipulation was eﬀective as well as whether the physiological response
to the two conditions diﬀered between the subgroups.  Regarding inhibitory control diﬃculties, we hypothesized that people with ASD with
M. W. M.  Kuiper Name
low baseline HRV levels would have signiﬁcantly more inhibitory
control diﬃculties compared to people with ASD with high baseline
HRV levels and compared to TD people with low and high baseline
HRV.  Additionally, we hypothesized that people with ASD with high
baseline HRV levels would perform similarly to TD people with low
baseline HRV levels.  Regarding the aﬀective manipulation, we hypothesized that the negative aﬀective manipulation would cause more
inhibitory control diﬃculties compared to the neutral condition for
people with ASD (both with low and high baseline HRV levels) as well
as for TD people with low baseline HRV levels. 