
In humans exposure to stressful conditions can result in debilitating
mental disorders with altered memory performances [1–3].  Response to
stress is complex and includes avoidance of contexts and cues associated with the stressor.  This avoidance behavior is mainly due to development of fear memory.  In addition to the development of fear
memory, which is often strong and persistent, there could be impairment of other forms of memories, along with the development of anxiety and depression as well as physiological changes.  While acute
stress and its neurological eﬀects were the focus of several studies,
chronic stress can also disrupt memory performance and change hippocampal cell structure and function [4,5].  Interestingly chronic stress
results in remarkable variability in memory performances [6–8] indicating multiple factors may be involved in modulation of memory
with chronic stress.  However, little is known about these factors and
especially their relationship with molecular and physiological processes
that modulate memory. 
Strength of the stress is a major factor that is positively correlated toin strong adverse psychobiological
the stress responses.  Traumatic stress such as exposure to predators canin rodents. 
Furthermore, exposure to predators [9] better mimic the life threatening stress that is often associated with human stress related psychiatric conditions such as PTSD.  Especially ethological relevance and
potency of predator exposure is believed to be a highly relevant approach for developing an intense, psychological response in rodents [9]. 
Chronic traumatic stress also has high human health relevance as many
stressors like childhood abuse, sexual abuse or domestic violence can
often be continual in nature.  Despite this relevance preclinical research
on chronic traumatic stress is scant and the propensity of chronic predator stress to develop defective memory performance is not well studied. 
The hippocampus located in the medial temporal lobe of the brain is
crucial for formation of memories [10,11].  Patients with stress disorders tend to have lower hippocampal volume and impaired hippocampus dependent memories [12–15].  In addition to neurotransmitter
receptors, such as cholinergic receptors, that are involved in the molecular mechanisms of memory encoding,the neurons
⁎ Corresponding author.  Department of Biological and Environmental Science, Texas A & M University−Commerce, Commerce, TX, Tel. 