Article
Nigrotectal Stimulation Stops Interval Timing in Mice
Highlights
d Novel head-ﬁxed timing task allows rapid acquisition of
timing behavior
d Single-trial analysis reveals stepping dynamics and strong
motivational modulation
d Nigrotectal pathway activation delays timing of future
behaviorKoji Toda, Nicholas A.  Lusk,
Glenn D. R.  Watson, . . . , Haofang E.  Li,
Warren H.  Meck, Henry H.  Yin
Correspondence
kt131@duke. edu (K. T. ),
hy43@duke. edu (H. H. Y. )
In Brief
Toda Name design a novel paradigm to
study interval timing in mice.  Using
optogenetic manipulations, the authors
show that activation of the nigrotectal
pathway not only suppresses ongoing
behavior but also delays timing of future
behavior.  These results suggest that
disrupting basal ganglia output can stop
central networks underlying timing. 
Toda Name, 2017, Current Biology 27, 3763–3770
December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 003
Current BiologyNigrotectal Stimulation
Stops Interval Timing in Mice
Koji Toda,1,2,3,5,* Nicholas A.  Lusk,1,5 Glenn D. R.  Watson,1 Namsoo Kim,1 Dongye Lu,4 Haofang E.  Li,1 Warren H.  Meck,1
and Henry H.  Yin1,4,6,*
1Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
2Human Informatics Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Umezono 1-1-1, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-8568, Japan
3Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Kojimachi 5-3-1, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0083, Japan
4Department of Neurobiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27708, USA
5These authors contributed equally
6Lead Contact
*Correspondence: kt131@duke. edu (K. T. ), hy43@duke. edu (H. H. Y. )
https://doi. org/10. 1016/j. cub. 2017. 11. 003Considerable evidence implicates the basal ganglia
in interval timing, yet the underlying mechanisms
remain poorly understood.  Using a novel behavioral
task, we demonstrate that head-ﬁxed mice can be
trained to show the key features of timing behavior
within a few sessions.  Single-trial analysis of licking
behavior reveals stepping dynamics with variable
onset times, which is responsible for the canonical
Gaussian distribution of timing behavior.  Moreover,
the duration of licking bouts decreased as mice
became sated, showing a strong motivational
modulation of licking bout initiation and termination. 
Using optogenetics, we examined the role of the
basal ganglia output in interval timing.  We stimulated a pathway important for licking behavior, the
GABAergic output projections from the substantia
nigra pars reticulata to the deep layers of the superior
colliculus.  We found that stimulation of this pathway
not only cancelled licking but also delayed the initiation of anticipatory licking for the next interval in a
frequency-dependent manner.  By combining quantitative behavioral analysis with optogenetics in the
head-ﬁxed setup, we established a new approach
for studying the neural basis of interval timing. 
INTRODUCTION
Time perception is unique because there are no dedicated sensory organs or receptors for time.  The brain appears to create the
subjective sense of time by integrating a variety of sensory inputs
and internal states [1].  Many studies have implicated corticobasal ganglia networks in interval timing in the seconds to minutes range [2–5].  However, it remains unclear how basal ganglia
output contributes to timing behavior. 
Traditional studies examining interval timing have two major
limitations.  First, the behavioral methods are time consuming
and yield results that are difﬁcult to interpret.  For example,
operant procedures using lever pressing as the behavioral
readout are commonly used across many species [6]. 
Training typically takes months and produces complex stereotyped behaviors between lever presses.  Second, techniques
commonly used in animal timing studies, like lesion, electrical stimulation, and pharmacological manipulations, cannot
precisely manipulate speciﬁc neuronal populations and neuroimaging timing studies in humans rely on correlational
analyses of brain activity and behavioral data [4, 7].  To overcome these limitations, we designed a novel task for studying
interval timing in head-ﬁxed mice during optogenetic manipulation of deﬁned neuronal populations.  Using a ﬁxed time
schedule of reinforcement, we trained mice to exhibit accurate timing behavior within a few hours.  Mice rapidly showed
licking behavior that peaks at the expected time of reward
delivery in accordance with previous studies using lever
presses as a behavioral measure [8, 9].  Licking on this task
can be precisely quantiﬁed and shows the hallmarks of interval timing. 
Licking is also a behavioral measure with well-characterized
neural circuits [10–12].  Previous work demonstrates the importance of a cortico-basal ganglia circuit, including the ventrolateral striatum and lateral substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) in
orofacial behavior [10, 13].  In particular, a subset of GABAergic
projections from the SNr to the deep layers of the superior
colliculus (SC)
is critical for the initiation and termination of
self-paced licking behavior [10, 14].  The basal ganglia output
regulates SC neurons in regulating licking bouts.  The SC output,
in turn, regulates central pattern generators in the brainstem to
generate orofacial and other movements [15, 16]. 
Optogenetic stimulation of
the nigrotectal pathway can
directly terminate licking behavior by uniformly increasing
inhibition of tectal projection neurons, thus disrupting descending motor commands [10].  By stimulating channelrhodopsin
(ChR2)-expressing GABAergic projection neurons in the SNr,
we could uniformly increase SNr output and interfere with the
normal pattern of nigrotectal signaling, which is time locked to
the licking bout [17].  Using this procedure combined with quantitative behavioral analysis, we examined the contribution of the
basal ganglia output to interval timing behavior in mice. 
Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd.  3763
In agreement with previous work in freely moving mice [10],
voluntary licking behavior was highly stereotyped, consisting of
bouts of rhythmic protrusion and retractions of the tongue at a
relatively ﬁxed rate (6–10 Hz) for both anticipatory and consummatory licking [17].  After training, all mice showed anticipatory
licking prior to each reward delivery (Figure 1C, left), starting
4–6 s before the reward and peaking at roughly the expected
time of reward delivery.  Consummatory licking stopped 2–4 s
after the reward delivery.  As the mouse became sated during
the session, anticipatory licking gradually decreased and
consummatory licking decreased more abruptly (Figure S1).  After training, all mice showed anticipatory licking prior to each
reward delivery (Figure 1C, left), starting 4–6 s before the reward
and peaking at roughly the expected time of reward delivery. 
Peak Probe Trials
After 5–10 days of training on the ﬁxed-time task, peak probe
trials were introduced (Figure 1B, right).  During these trials,
reward delivery was omitted, followed by an extended period
of no reward delivery.  Probe trials lasted for 30–40 s and were
randomly inserted with 20% probability.  Mice readily learned
this peak procedure with maximal response rates occurring
around 10 s (i. e. , the expected reward time) within a few days
(Figure 1C, right). 
A hallmark of interval timing is the spread in timing of behavior
scales linearly with the temporal duration being timed.  This ‘‘scalar property’’ is analogous to the Weber-Fechner law in psychophysics [1].  To test whether mice also exhibit the scalar property
using our novel behavioral paradigm, three mice were trained on
the peak procedure with two additional intervals: 7. 5 and 15 s
(Figure 2A).  All mice tested were highly accurate in timing these
intervals (Figure 2B; 7. 5-s condition: 8. 09 ± 0. 10 s; 10-s condition: 10. 33 ± 0. 14 s; 15-s condition: 15. 26 ± 0. 19 s; n = 13 for
each condition; 3–5 sessions for each duration for three mice). 
Performance on these three durations was normalized by the
peak response time and maximum lick rate and then superimposed across all three intervals (Figure 2C).  The resulting data
clearly demonstrate the scalar property (Figure 2D; 7. 5-s condition: 0. 55 ± 0. 04; 10-s condition: 0. 56 ± 0. 03; 15-s condition:
0. 59 ± 0. 02; n = 13 for each condition; 3–5 sessions for each
duration for 3 subjects).  This result establishes that the headﬁxed peak procedure is a powerful method that not only expedites training but also produces results with the essential
features of interval timing behavior. 
Stepping Dynamics and Motivational Modulation of
Licking Behavior
To reveal ‘‘single-trial’’ dynamics of the licking behavior [17, 19],
we analyzed behavioral data during each interval using statistical
methods previously used for ﬁtting latent dynamical spike-train
models [19].  Our analysis revealed that behavior during the
ﬁxed-time-schedule task is well described by a ‘‘stepping’’
model for both the start and end of the licking bout (Figures 3A
and 3B).  In other words, the licking behavior displays stepping
dynamics with variable step onset and offset times.  In accordance with traditional lever-pressing data from rodents, the canonical Gaussian distribution found on peak trials, a key feature
of interval timing behavior, is a product of averaging many trials. 
This conclusion is in agreement with a recent study that found
Figure 1.  Experimental Setup and Behavioral Tasks
(A) Head-ﬁxed setup.  Mice were placed on a raised platform and secured in
place by head bars attached to chronic implants.  A blunt-tipped needle is
placed within licking distance, allowing for administration of a 10% sucrose
reward using a solenoid under the control of an Arduino and MATLAB
Psychtoolbox. 
(B) Schematic diagram of the behavioral tasks.  In the ﬁxed-time-schedule task
(left), a drop of water was delivered every 10 s throughout the session.  Once
mice demonstrated anticipatory licking, they were transitioned to a peak
procedure (right), where 20% of rewards were omitted on probe trials in order
to estimate their internal representation of expected time of reward delivery. 
(C) Examples of behavioral data.  Individual trial (top) and cumulative Peristimulus time histogram (PSTH) (bottom) of licking behavior during rewarded
(left) and peak (right) trials. 
See also Figure S1. 
<Middle> RESULTS. 
Behavioral Performance
Mice were trained on a 10-s ﬁxed-time-schedule task (Figures
1A and 1B, left).  Head-ﬁxed mice voluntarily licked a blunt-tipped drinking needle placed in front of their mouth that delivered
a 10% sucrose solution every 10 s.  A solenoid connected to an
Arduino slaved to a custom-written MATLAB Psychtoolbox
scripts controlled sucrose delivery.  No external conditioned
stimulus was presented.  Individual
licking contacts between
mice and the drinking needle were recorded with a contact
lickometer [18]. 
3764 Current Biology 27, 3763–3770, December 18, 2017
Figure 2.  Demonstration of Scalar Property
(A) PSTHs for 7. 5-, 10-, and 15-s ﬁxed-time-schedule tasks (n = 3–5 sessions for each condition for three mice).  Vertical dashed lines represent the expected
reward time. 
(B) Accuracy of timing behavior across durations determined by average peak time for individual sessions (n = 13 sessions for each condition). 
(C) Overlay of the behavior from the three ﬁxed-interval durations normalized by max lick rate (y axis) and time of peak lick rate (x axis), demonstrating superimposition (n = 3–5 sessions for each condition for three mice). 
(D) Relative precision of timing behavior as indicated by Weber fraction (n = 13 sessions for each condition).  n. s. , not signiﬁcant (n = 13 sessions; p value > 0. 05,
one-way ANOVA). 
similar stepping dynamics in the lever-pressing behavior of
rats [20]. 
Our single-trial analysis also made it possible to analyze how
changes in internal states during a single session affect timing
behavior [21].  Early in the session, when water-deprived mice
were highly motivated, licking started earlier and ended later
with higher rates (Figure 3C).  As mice became sated, anticipatory licking and bout duration gradually decreased, but the
center of the bout, which reﬂects the expected timing of the
reward delivery, did not change signiﬁcantly.  Bout duration
was strongly modulated by motivational state (n = 10 mice;
p < 0. 05, unpaired t test), but the peak of the licking response
was not (Figure 3D; n = 10 mice; p > 0. 05, unpaired t test). 
Thus, motivational state has a strong impact on the variance
of timing behavior.  Traditionally, data from the entire session
are used to analyze the peak and variance.  Because the
observed variance can be partly attributed to motivational modulation, traditional methods systematically underestimate the
precision of timing behavior. 
Effect of Nigrotectal GABAergic Pathway Stimulation onWe previously showed that optogenetic stimulation of the SNrSC GABAergic pathway disrupts self-paced licking behavior by
uniformly increasing inhibition of deep/intermediate-layer tectal
neurons and interfering with motor commands from SNr neurons
[10].  To examine the function of the SNr-SC GABAergic pathway
in timing, we expressed Cre-dependent ChR2 bilaterally with
AAV5-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-eYFP in the lateral SNr of
Vgat-IRES-Cre mice (Vgat::ChR2 SNr-SC; n = 6) and targeted
the axon terminals in the lateral SC with optic ﬁbers (Figures
4A–4C and S2). 