
Opioid peptides have a long history of involvement in pain, reward,
and learning and memory.  Previous reports from our laboratory and
others have demonstrated that the general opioid antagonist naloxone,
impairs learning of many associative tasks such as delay conditioning,
operant lever-pressing behavior, fear conditioning, and trace eyeblink
conditioning [1–5].  In exploring the role for speciﬁc opioid receptors in
learning and memory, our laboratory has shown that antagonizing the
kappa-opioid receptor (KOR) impairs acquisition for the associative
paradigm whisker-trace eyeblink (WTEB) conditioning [6]. 
In WTEB conditioning a neutral conditioned stimulus (CS; Whisker
stimulation) is paired following a stimulus free trace interval with a
salient unconditioned stimulus that elicits an eye-blink (US; Eye shock). 
This paradigm has been shown to be dependent on, and induce plasticity in primary somatosensory cortex (S1), a likely site for memory
storage [7–10].  Our subsequent studies exploring the role of KOR with
learning have demonstrated that either systemic or direct S1 KOR inhibition impairs WTEB acquisition [6].  Consistent with our ﬁndings,
many studies have shown that KOR modulation can alter learning on
various tasks such as inhibitory avoidance, spontaneous alternation,
water-maze, radial-arm-maze, and conditioned place aversion [11–15]. 
These studies have strongly suggested that KOR plays a prominent role
in mediating various types of learning. 
KOR’s endogenous ligand and the most likely molecular trigger for
these eﬀects on learning is dynorphin.  Dynorphin is synthesized from
the precursor peptide prodynorphin (PD), which is synthesized in vesicles from the precursor preprodynorphin (PPD) [16].  Similar to KOR,
Dynorphin and its upstream precursors have been implicated in various
forms of learning.  For instance, PD knockout mice exhibit enhanced
levels of freezing in a contextual fear conditioning task [17].  Likewise,
dynorphin knockout mice display reduced age-related deﬁcits in water
⁎ Corresponding author at: Beckman Institute, 405 N.  Mathews Ave, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. 
E-mail addresses: RyanLoh2@illinois. edu (R.  Loh), Smcolli2@illinois. edu (S.  Collins), Rgalvez@illinois. edu (R.  Galvez). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 015
Received 14 June 2017; Received in revised form 31 July 2017; Accepted 5 August 2017
Available online 09 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
R.  Loh Name
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 145–150
maze learning [18], while dynorphin injected directly into the hippocampus impairs water maze performance [19].  Although the speciﬁc
role of dynorphin and its precursors in learning appears to vary depending upon the tasks, these studies collectively suggest that they play
a prominent role in the acquisition and consolidation of learning tasks. 
Upon exploring the speciﬁc cell type expressing these peptides, it
has been demonstrated that the dynorphin precursor ligand PPD is
primarily found in Somatostatin-containing GABAergic interneurons
(SOM) within S1 [20].  These ﬁndings suggest that SOM interneurons
are a likely upstream cell of KOR activation in S1 with WTEB.  SOMs are
a major subclass of interneurons in the central nervous system that
serve a variety of roles in various species.  SOM cells represent a signiﬁcant proportion of all inhibitory interneurons in the neocortex [21]. 
Additionally, this population of cells is localized in areas important for
learning and memory, such as the neocortex and hippocampus [22],
two brain regions critically involved in WTEB acquisition [8,23,24].  In
S1, tonically-active SOM cells serve to inhibit neuronal activity, as
optogenetic silencing SOM cells causes an increase in ﬁring of pyramidal cells in the area.  SOM cells in S1 also receive input from vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)-containing inhibitory interneurons. 
Interestingly, during active whisking, VIP-containing cells cause a decrease in SOM activity [25].  This process does not seem to require active whisking by the animal as passive whisking will also instigate the
same mechanism via thalamic relays [26]. 
Similar to that observed with KOR modulation, studies have
strongly suggested a role for SOM cells in learning.  Silencing SOM cells
in the hippocampus impairs acquisition of contextual-based fear
learning [27].  SOM cells are also disinhibited by VIP-containing inhibitory neurons during auditory discrimination [28].  This VIP disinhibition is similar to what is seen in S1 during active [25], or passive
whisking [26].  Additionally, SOM cells have been demonstrated to increase in density within somatosensory cortex in a whisker associative
paradigm [29].  These studies suggest that neocortical SOM cells regulate learning processes.  Furthermore, these studies along with those
mentioned above collectively suggest that neocortical SOM cells are
regulating learning through KOR modulation.  However, the speciﬁc
role for neocortical SOM regulation of KOR activity with associative
learning has never been explored.  To explore this molecular pathway
and its potential role with associative learning, the current study set out
to characterize the expression proﬁle of PD (Dynorphin’s precursor) in
S1 SOM interneurons during and immediately following WTEB acquisition. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  Animals
Three to six month old male C57BL/6 mice were bred in-house and
housed in same litter groups until surgery.  After surgery they were
transferred to individual housing in standard (12” × 12” × 12”) laboratory cages.  All mice were kept on a 12-h light-dark schedule (lights
on at 0700) in a temperature controlled room (∼21° C) and provided ad
libitum access to food and water.  All procedures performed were reviewed and approved by the University of Illinois Animal Care and Use
Committee. 
2. 2.  Surgery
Surgeries were performed as previously described [30].  Mice were
placed under ketamine (1 mg/kg i. p. ) and xylazine (6 mg/kg i. p. ) anesthesia.  Once anesthetized, a headgear consisting of a plastic strip
connector with two Teﬂon-coated stainless steel wires and one uncoated ground wire were secured to the skull via dental cement.  Teﬂoncoated wires from the headgear were fed under the skin to the periorbital region of the eye, stripped to provide contact, and fastened to
the skin.  A ground wire was tightly secured to a screw in the skull.  All
mice were given a minimum of seven days to recover from surgery
before onset of training. 
2. 3.  Behavioral training
Mice were placed into standard laboratory cages diﬀerent from their
home-cage in a sound- and light-attenuated chamber.  All WTEB
training took place between 0900 and 1400.  The headgear described in
the surgery section was connected to a tether that was connected to a
computer running a custom LabView program.  The program delivered
both whisker and shock stimuli as well as monitored eyelid closure via a
camera attached to the tether.  Whisker stimulation was delivered via
activation of a piezo-electric strip (Piezo Systems, Cambridge, MA) attached to a comb that was situated directly in front of the whisker pad. 
This allowed for precise control in stimuli presentation, timing and
delivery.  For a complete description see Ref.  [30].  One day prior to
training, mice were habituated to the tether and chamber for 10 min. 
On training days, mice were conditioned as previously described [30]. 
A presentation of the CS (250 ms whisker stimulation) was paired with
a US (100 ms periorbital shock, 0. 1–0. 5 mA square wave shock, 60 Hz,
0. 5 ms pulses).  The US shock intensity was tailored to each mouse to
generate a detectable eye-blink response with minimal voltage.  The CS
and US were separated by a 250 ms stimulus-free trace interval (Fig.  1). 
Mice were presented with the CS-US pairings 30 times per session (day)
with an intertrial interval of 15–25 s (mean of 20 s).  To monitor eyelid
closure a camera on the tether provided a live video feed of the eye that
was converted to a binary image in LabView in real time. 