
Alexithymia is a personality trait involving deﬁcits in emotional processing.  The personality construct has been
extensively validated, but the underlying neural and physiological systems remain controversial.  One theory
suggests that low-level somatosensory mechanisms act as somatic markers of emotion, underpinning cognitive
and aﬀective impairments in alexithymia.  In two separate samples (total N = 100), we used an established
Quantitative Sensory Testing (QST) battery to probe multiple neurophysiological submodalities of somatosensation, and investigated their associations with the widely-used Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20). 
Experiment one found reduced sensitivity to warmth in people with higher alexithymia scores, compared to
individuals with lower scores, without deﬁcits in other somatosensory submodalities.  Experiment two replicated
this result in a new group of participants using a full-sample correlation between threshold for warm detection
and TAS-20 scores.  We discuss the relations between low-level thermoceptive function and cognitive processing
of emotion. 
Alexithymia is a multifaceted personality construct, expressed with
varying intensity in the general population.  Self-report measures like
the Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS) (Bagby, Parker, & Taylor, 1994),
the most widely used and well-validated assessment tool (Bagby Name,
1994; Parker, Michael Bagby, Taylor, Endler, & Schmitz, 2003) characterise alexithymia through three main facets: diﬃculties in identifying feelings (DIF), diﬃculties in describing feelings (DDF), and externally-oriented thinking or a preoccupation with the details of
external events (EOT).  Dimensional analysis suggest alexithymia comprises an aﬀective dimension, involving emotionalizing, and fantasizing, and a cognitive dimension, involving identifying, diﬀerentiatingBruce, Martens,
Aleman, & Hooker, 2014; Herbert, Herbert, & Pollatos, 2011; Parker,
Keefer, Taylor, & Bagby, 2008; Taylor, Bagby, & Parker, 1991).  Importantly, people with high levels of alexithymia exhibit diﬃculties not
only in processing their own emotions, but also in processing the
emotions
Borgomaneri,
Làdavas, & Bertini, 2016; Jessimer & Markham, 1997; Parker Name,Di
Prkachin, & Prkachin,
Scarpazza,
expressed
describing
feelings
(Goerlich-Dobre,by(Borhani,Pellegrino, & Làdavas, 2014; Sifneos, 1973).  Thus, alexithymic individuals show altered recognition of emotional stimuli (Grynberg
Name, 2012; Ihme Name, 2014) and decreased activation of the amygdala during presentation of emotional stimuli (Jongen Name, 2014;
Moriguchi & Komaki, 2013), and particularly negative stimuli (Kugel
Name, 2008; Pouga, Berthoz, de Gelder, & Grezes, 2010; Reker Name,
2010; for a recent metaanalysis: van der Velde Name, 2013). 
The relation between alexithymic traits and speciﬁc neural systems
or pathways remains controversial.  The multiple somatosensory pathways that transmit interoceptive, proprioceptive, mechanoreceptive
and nociceptive information to the CNS are a plausible candidate.  The
view of emotions as linked to bodily states, or ‘somatic markers’ has
long been popular (Damasio. , 1999; Damasio, Everitt, & Bishop, 1996;
James, 1890).  Indeed, emotion-speciﬁc responses have been reported in
primary somatosensory cortex (Sel, Forster, & Calvo-Merino, 2014). 
Such theories suggest that alexithymia might involve abnormalities of
somatosensory or autonomic processing.  Disruption in regulation of
emotions in alexithymia, particularly negative emotions, is thought to
result in chronic sympathetic hyperarousal, high sensitivity to painful
stimulation, somatosensory ampliﬁcation (the tendency to experience
mild somatic sensations as intense, noxious, and disturbing – Barsky,
⁎ Corresponding author at: Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London, 17 Queen Square, London WC1N 3AZ, UK. 
E-mail address: p. haggard@ucl. ac. uk (P.  Haggard). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. biopsycho. 2017. 07. 012
Received 3 January 2017; Received in revised form 16 July 2017; Accepted 16 July 2017
Available online 20 July 2017
0301-0511/ © 2017 The Authors.  Published by Elsevier B. V.  This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons. org/licenses/BY/4. 0/). 
K.  Borhani Name
Biological Psychology 128 (2017) 132–140tvtsedarcamhieaeweniaercvtspncigSiptotlmtlcrcllfiPSS(lcsnpctaytaHotlmtlrcininticnlcttvtsedaiytxlsrcSSda2AnetbeweniaercotlroeiioeiiotaﬁnitaﬁniydcdiotselrcifgiscrnaBAS2A:toefesurlrncniasctmshyPtaiirphle115sehenVnḱčly)02)02. aeaa)02. aenKodacmhieaeweenrﬀdtrvsipncigsipttvtsedaiytxlnetbotlrNNranisunalic0_AyintiiPA:rprtoefefenataglmocnrctwtetPersdiprftmstwtetP95)91rlnKndalM49(ltxCcmhiealhehnadaiytxlnetbotlrNlarhdalaiacmodosrtotee,sveamlbtwtetPaornieoatwtetP769(ltnaZdttvtseeosASndaiytxlnetbotiostaﬁniamhieaeweniaercncigsNNlmttaalnterseplctcaeonaSSSTsrprlSipeunsnpctaytaHipnnianniohhisniasnpctaytaH46100(20(l. aeergrnscJ3579LatHiodvaotmgicagiudtvtarmrwnienabrseoaoseilnioenhtWtaiirphle1)02. aeosrK1eosASn0STeweniaercvtspncigSotcipArseoao0STsrprlStetpitics1149(ltei. slsRotmanmrpEtaiirPredarhuo. iytxlngiscryonstmsnsedaedtykoemnszrmu1lagiscryonstmsaiyatiytxlgiaesiuS
Hamaguchi,2007;
Yanai, & Fukudo,
Goodson, Lane, & Cleary, 1988) and complaints of physical symptomsLumley,
Stettner, & Wehmer, 1996).  Brain regions previously associated with
somatosensory processing,
including the insula and somatosensory
cortices (Dijkerman & De Haan, 2007; Iwamura, 1998) were hypothesised to be overactive during emotional processing in alexithymia, potentially explaining the tendency to experience physical symptoms
when emotionally aroused (Karlsson, Näätänen, & Stenman, 2008). 
However other studies failed to ﬁnd associations between somatosensory ampliﬁcation and alexithymia (Gregory, Manring, & Berry, 2000;
Kosturek, Gregory, Sousou, & Trief, 1998; Lesser, Koehle, & Lueders,
1979).  Moreover, the frequent comorbidity of alexithymia with several
psychiatric disorders may contribute to such discrepancies.  For instance, while Nyklı́ček and Vingerhoets (2000) reported hypersensitivity for pain and touch in alexithymia, de Zwaan, Biener, Bach,
Wiesnagrotzki, and Stacher (1996) failed to ﬁnd any association between the degree of alexithymia and thermally and mechanically induced pain thresholds, in a group of eating disorder patients with
alexithymia (de Zwaan Name, 1996).  Table 1. 
This summary shows a high heterogeneity of both methods and
conclusions in previous research.  Indeed, existing accounts make conﬂicting predictions about the direction of any putative association between alexithymia and somatosensation.  On the one hand, somatosensory cortical areas (e. g.  right primary and secondary somatosensory
areas and the insula) are positively activated during emotion recognition in healthy volunteers (Adolphs, 2002), suggesting that high alexithymia might be associated with reduced somatosensory processing.  On
the other hand, the somatosensory ampliﬁcation concept predicts increased somatosensory processing at least for some somatosensory
modalities such as pain, and visceral sensation (Barsky Name, 1988;
Ihme Name, 2014; Kano Name, 2007; Perez, Barsky, Vago,
Baslet, & Silbersweig, 2015). 
Detailed understanding of relations between alexithymia and somatosensory processing has been hampered by the lack of psychophysiologically-validated measures of somatosensory processing in the
alexithymia literature.  Somatosensory systems can be divided into
several submodalities, each reﬂecting a distinct class of stimulus energy, peripheral receptor, aﬀerent pathways and cortical target.  Within
thermoception, for example, warm and cold sensations are mediated by
diﬀerent aﬀerent ﬁbres, and are therefore considered distinct submodalities.  Some somatosensory submodalities, such as mechanoreceptive light touch, are classically interpreted as exteroceptive,
while others, such as visceral baroreception, are considered interoceptive.  The theoretical and empirical confusion over somatosensory
processing in alexithymia may arise partly from lack of a systematic
experimental approach to measuring somatosensation itself.  Few studies of alexithymia have taken account of modern psychophysiological
approaches to pathway-speciﬁc somatosensory perception, and few
have tested multiple somatosensory submodalities.  Thus, the existence
and speciﬁcity of any link between somatosensory processing and
alexithymia remains unclear. 
We therefore performed two studies relating alexithymia scores to
performance on established psychophysiological quantitative sensory
testing (QST) battery (Rolke, Baron Name, 2006).  QST involves multiple
psychophysical tests, assessing the neurophysiological function of the
major somatosensory aﬀerent ﬁbre pathways from the skin (Hansson,
Backonja, & Bouhassira, 2007).  QST is widely used in neurology, and
extensive normative data are available (Rolke, Baron Name, 2006;
Rolke, Magerl Name, 2006).  Importantly, each QST subtest focuses on a
speciﬁc somatosensory submodality, so QST has potentially high sensitivity to identify selective deﬁcits in speciﬁc neurophysiological
pathways.  We used the following QST subtests: warm threshold, cold
threshold, pinprick radiant heat pain threshold, and somatosensory
detection.  These tests are thought to involve the following aﬀerent
pathways respectively: somatosensory detection – Aβ primarily, but
potentially also Aδ and C-ﬁbres; warm – C-ﬁbre; cold – Aδ-ﬁbre –K. 