
In recent years, opioids have become the second most commonly
initiated drug of abuse.  A study by the National Survey of Drug Use and
Health revealed that 12. 5 million Americans reported opioid abuse.  As a
consequence, the incidence of overdose is reaching alarming rates
across North America [1]. 
A major limiting factor in the ﬁght against opioid abuse is the
limited number of therapies currently available.  Despite the current
situation, there is no eﬀective medical treatment for this type of addiction.  Substitution therapies are the only options currently available,
consisting of a slow acting opioid such as methadone [2] or in some
cases a combination of partial agonists (buprenorphine) and antagonists
(naltrexone) [1].  Despite some success in controlling drug intake, these
therapies do not treat drug seeking directly and are often unsuccessful
[1], leading to a high rate of relapse.  Therefore, increasing eﬀorts are
being put toward the development of drug addiction models to study
the biological mechanism of substance abuse and to ﬁnd new treatment
options.  So far, rodents and non-human primates have been used almost
exclusively [3]. 
Over the years, two main categories of assays have been developed
to study addiction in animal models.  The ﬁrst consists of the non-contingent assays, including locomotor sensitization and the conditioned
place preference paradigms.  The second category consists of the contingent models, including diﬀerent types of self-administration assays
requiring a self-operant response in order to receive a dose [4].  Contingent assays are considered more signiﬁcant and have been shown to
be an eﬃcient way to identify compounds aﬀecting addiction [5].  One
of the main diﬀerences between these two categories resides in the fact
that conditioned place preference is a form of passive administration, as
opposed to self-administration, which is an active administration.  This
distinction is important because studies have demonstrated that active
administration leads to diﬀerent molecular and structural changes in
the addicted brain [6,7]. 
An interesting alternative to rodents or non-human primates in
fundamental research is Danio rerio (zebraﬁsh), which is becoming an
important model for dissecting complex neurological disorders [8,9]. 
Previous studies demonstrated that zebraﬁsh are sensitive to a wide
variety of drugs of abuse [10–15], including opioids [11,16].  In fact,
several important neuronal networks implicated in addiction in humans
are conserved in zebraﬁsh [17,18].  As with other models, ﬁsh show
signs of addiction as well as withdrawal symptoms [19–22]. ⁎ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: randall. peterson@pharm. utah. edu (R. T.  Peterson). 
http://dx. doi. org/10. 1016/j. bbr. 2017. 08. 001
Received 12 May 2017; Received in revised form 31 July 2017; Accepted 1 August 2017
Available online 12 August 2017
0166-4328/ 
G. D.  Bossé, R. T.  Peterson
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 158–166
addition, given its ease of genetic manipulation and the ability to perform in vivo small molecule screening, zebraﬁsh have potential to be a
powerful addition to the addiction research community. 
Thus far, most substance abuse research in zebraﬁsh has been based
on the conditioned place preference paradigm [11,13,14,23].  In these
assays, a drug is delivered in a speciﬁc area of a tank combined with a
speciﬁc visual cue, and trained ﬁsh developed a preference for the area
presenting the cue.  Alternatively, a choice assay has been described in
which ﬁsh larvae are given the option between an opioid solution in
one end of the tank and a drug-free environment at the other end. 
Zebraﬁsh larvae preferentially swim toward the side with morphine,
and this preference is dependent on the dopamine pathway [16].  So far,
a very limited number of active administration assays have been reported with zebraﬁsh.  Recently, an active alcohol administration protocol was designed in which ﬁsh are trained to voluntary consume
gelatin containing various percentages of ethanol.  Using this technique,
it was shown that ﬁsh consume a larger amount of a 10% EtOH gelatin
compared to gelatin without EtOH [24].  Although this assay is an active
form of administration, there was no increase in administration over
time and no evidence of addiction development.  Therefore, the use of
zebraﬁsh as an addiction model remains limited by the absence of a
bona ﬁde self-administration model. 
In order to overcome such limitations, we developed an opioid selfadministration assay using young adult zebraﬁsh, modeled after the
self-administrations used in mammals.  In this assay, ﬁsh are trained to
trigger the delivery of a hydrocodone solution by swimming across a
speciﬁc underwater platform within a test arena.  Fish trained to selfadminister opioids demonstrate an escalation in the number of doses
received, and self-administration is dependent on the μ-opioid receptor
as well as two key pathways for drug addiction: the dopamine and
glutamate pathways.  The development of this assay will enable improved understanding of
the biological mechanism driving drug
seeking. 
<Middle> Methods. 
2. 1.  Animal housing
Ekkwill strain zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) (EkkWill Waterlife Resources)
were maintained and embryos were obtained according to standard ﬁsh
husbandry protocols and with the approval of the Massachusetts
General Hospital and University of Utah Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committees. 
2. 2.  Experimental apparatus
2. 2. 1.  Design of the testing arena
The conditioning arena consists of a plastic tray (4-3/4 Gallon
Shallow Tray − 17-1/2"L x 15-1/2"W x 5"H, USPlastic, USA) with delimited submersible square platforms and connected to a larger water
reservoir (15 gallons plastic bin, USPlastic, USA) equipped with a pump
(Supreme Aqua-Mag, Thatﬁshplace, USA) to generate a continuous recirculating ﬂow of water (Fig.  1A).  The arena is illuminated with a
warm white light source (2700 K, 40 W, CFL bulb, McMasterCarr, USA)
providing just enough light to allow the ﬁsh to identify the diﬀerent
platforms without aﬀecting behavior (Fig.  1A). 
Infrared cameras (PiNoir camera, Adafruit, USA) are installed over
each platform and are each connected to a mini-computer Raspberry Pi
2 (Adafruit, USA) to monitor movement above each platform.  To generate optimal
light conditions for the camera, an LED strip light
(850 nm, Environmental Lights, USA) was installed above the arena. 
One of the platforms is called the “active platform” and is yellow
while the “inactive platform” is identical but is white.  The color yellow
was chosen because ﬁsh do not seem to have a natural preference for
this color [25,26].  The computer connected to the camera above the
active platform also controls a peristaltic 12 V pump (Adafruit, USA)
and a small green LED (Adafruit, USA).  A small silicone tube is ﬁxed to
one side of the active platform to allow direct delivery of the drug at the
platform. 
2. 2. 2.  Development of the coding script
The Raspberry Pi2 used in our assay runs on the latest Raspbian
operating system and a homemade Python script was written to control
the assay.  The script was designed to detect the movement generated by
a ﬁsh swimming across the platform by comparing the pixel diﬀerence
between the image of the current frame with the average image of the
previous frames.  Movement above a platform was deﬁned as a triggering event when the pixel diﬀerence was higher than a manually set
threshold.  The threshold was set to the minimum value for which the
circulating water was not triggering the pump and was set for each
experiment.  The code was also designed to record the elapsed time,
save an image of the frame in which the motion is detected and record
the total number of triggering events detected.  Finally, when a triggering event was detected above the active platform, the pump and the
LED light were activated for 0. 3 s to deliver a dose of drug and to
provide a secondary reinforcing cue. 
2. 3.  Animal conditioning
2. 3. 1.  Animal pre-conditioning
Two to three-month-old ﬁsh were used as they are large enough to
provide good movement detection yet small enough to maintain in
large groups. 
The main goal of this assay was to condition ﬁsh to associate the
action of swimming over the active platform with receiving a dose of
drug.  Because the arena was a novel environment which could be a
source of stress [27] and the fact that opioids can be aversive for naïve
animals [28], we decided to perform pre-conditioning sessions.  The preconditioning protocol was divided in two steps, the ﬁrst one consisted
of performing one habituation session of 50 min daily for 5 days in the
arena, allowing the ﬁsh to swim freely in the arena.  During those sessions, ﬁsh food (Larval, AP100, Zeigler, USA) was administered when
motion was detected above the active platform, thus providing a reward
for this action.  These sessions allowed the animals to acclimatize to the
arena and forged a positive association with the action of swimming
across the active platform.  At the opposite end, swimming above the
inactive platform did not trigger anything, thus no positive reinforcement was developed toward this platform. 
The second step of the pre-conditioning was to expose the animals
to hydrocodone (1. 5 mg/L) for 60 min in a separate tank following the
session in the arena.  Such pre-exposure to an opioid has been shown to
improve opioid self-administration training in rodents [28,29]. 
Additionally, to further reduce the stress associated with our assay,
we decided to condition the animals in groups of 15 ﬁsh, as it has been
shown that social isolation is a stressful condition for zebraﬁsh [30]. 
The number of animals was selected based on early preliminary tests in
the arena (data not shown).  To avoid pre-selection bias and to get a
more uniform training across the diﬀerent groups, ﬁsh were re-grouped
each night in large tanks containing 50–70 animals. 
The combination of pre-training in the arena and pre-exposure to
opioids served to acclimatize ﬁsh to the assay, forge a positive association with the active platform and sensitize the animals to opioids. 
2. 3. 2.  Opioid self-administration conditioning
The opioid self-administration conditioning followed an approach
similar to the pre-conditioning.  Small groups of 15 animals were
trained for 50 min daily for 5 consecutive days.  As with the pre-conditioning, to avoid any bias toward gender or potential genetic predisposition between the diﬀerent groups, as well as to generate uniform
trainings, animals were kept in large groups between sessions and
conditioned in randomly selected subgroups of 15. 
As with the pre-conditioning, ﬁsh were allowed to swim freely in theG. D.  Bossé, R. T.  Peterson
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 158–166
Fig.  1.  Opioid self-administration conditioning.  A: Layout of the conditioning arena.  B: Fish generated a speciﬁc increase in triggering events at the active platform (n = 11) C: Fish
trained with only water from the main system did not increase the number of triggering events (n = 6).  Treatment with naloxone (2. 7 μM) [11], for 60 min before each sessions abolished
the increase in triggering events generated at the active platform (n = 5).  Error bars represent a 95% conﬁdence coeﬃcient.  *p-value < 0. 01, ** p-value < 4e-5. 
arena but with the added factor of triggering the release of a dose of
1. 5 μg of hydrocodone from a solution of 6 mg/L diluted in water from
the main system by swimming across the active platform.  Each triggering event resulted in drug delivery, in accordance with a ﬁxed ratio
(FR) training previously established in other models [3,28].  The continuous ﬂow of water prevented the saturation of the system and forced
ﬁsh to re-activate the pump in order to receive another dose of drug. 
2. 4.  Animal behavior
2. 4. 1.  Novel tank assay
The novel tank assay was performed in a 1. 5L tank (15. 2 cm height
x 7. 1 cm width x 27. 9 cm long from Aquatic Habitats, Apopkam, USA)
ﬁlled with water from the main system.  The assay was performed between 12pm and 4pm and recorded for 5 min.  We tested 3 ﬁsh at the
same time as it has been suggested that small groups could yield more
consistent results than individual ﬁsh [31].  The animals were transferred to the middle of the novel tank.  The ActualTrack software (ActualAnalysis, UK) was used to analyze the videos.  To analyze the exploration rate, two zones were created in the software, the center and
the rest of the tank.  The software recorded the position of the ﬁsh in the
tank and generated the data for the latency to enter the diﬀerent zones,
time spent, number of visits in the zones.  The software gave the position
(x, y) of the body center for each ﬁsh, the latency to enter the other
area, the total time spent in the diﬀerent areas and the number of visits. 
The coordinates of the body center of each ﬁsh were used to calculate
the distance between each pair of animals with the equation:( 2x2( 2y22. 5.  Chemical treatment
The following chemicals were use in this paper; Hydrocodone hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), Naloxone hydrochloride dihydrate
(Sigma-Aldrich, USA), SCH-23390 hydrochloride (Tocris, UK), MK-801
maleate (Tocris, UK), Ketamine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)
and CNQX (Tocris, UK). 3.  Results
3. 1.  Opioid conditioning
To test our conditioning protocol, we used a wild-type strain of
zebraﬁsh (Ekkwill) and analyzed the number of triggering events produced in every training session for the active and the inactive platforms. 
The analysis of the number of triggering events revealed that on the
ﬁrst day of training, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence detected between the active platform (1249 ± 338 events) compared to the inactive platform (956 ± 380 events) (Fig.  1B). 
As the week progressed, the number of triggering events increased
for the active platform and decreased for the inactive platform such that
the diﬀerence between the two platforms became signiﬁcant (Fig.  1B). 
By day 5, there were 1771 ± 369 triggering events detected above the
active platform, representing a 41% increase compared to day 1,
whereas, we observed a total of 139 ± 51 triggering event at the inactive platform representing an 85% decrease in triggering events for
the inactive platform between the ﬁrst and last day of training.  Thus,
the increase in events detected is speciﬁc for the active platform.  As
mentioned earlier, in this assay, each triggering event detected for the
active platform resulted in one pump activation and thus the delivery of
one dose of hydrocodone. 
In order to conﬁrm that this increase in motion events was caused
by the presence of hydrocodone in the solution and not just a preference
for the color yellow or a consequence of the pre-conditioning with food,
we repeated the training with pre-conditioned animals but the hydrocodone solution was substituted with only water from the main system. 
Without opioid delivery, training failed to produce any increase in the
number of triggering events for the active platform and caused the total
activation for both platforms to decrease by more than 50% from day 1
(Fig.  1C).  We also observed a similar number of triggering events detected through the week between the active and inactive platforms. 
The activity of opioids is mainly dependent upon their binding to
the μ-opioid receptor [32].  Therefore, to conﬁrm that the self-administration of hydrocodone in our assay was dependent on this receptor,
we treated ﬁsh with the μ-opioid receptor antagonist, naloxone.  It has
been shown that naloxone can block CPP and opioid self-administration
G. D.  Bossé, R. T.  Peterson
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 158–166
in diﬀerent animal models [33].  We treated ﬁsh with naloxone for
60 min before each pre-conditioning session as well as before each
training session.  As expected, blocking the μ-opioid receptor prevented
development of self-administration behavior.  As observed with the
water treated groups, the total number of motion events decreased by
more than 75% for both platforms as the week progressed and no difference was observed between the platforms (Fig.  1D). 
These results suggest that the speciﬁc increase in motion events
observed for the active platform is dependent on the administration of
the opioid and implicate the μ-opioid receptor [11,16]. 
3. 2.  Hallmarks of addiction
3. 2. 1.  Self-administration despite adverse consequences
One of the main characteristics of addiction is the repeat administration of a drug despite adverse consequences such as physical or
mental pain.  For example, addicted animals will exhibit sustained administration while faced with a physical punishment such as electric
shock [18,34–37].  We therefore sought to determine if zebraﬁsh would
continue to exhibit self-administration in the face of conditions normally aversive to them. 
It has been previously shown that zebraﬁsh prefer deep water, and
that shallow water can trigger anxiety [38,39].  This particular behavior
allowed us to create an aversive condition in our assay by raising the
height of the active platform.  As a consequence, the water level above
the active platform was reduced by ≈25%.  Instinctively, ﬁsh should
avoid swimming above the elevated platform unless the reward associated with it is powerful enough. 
Before testing hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh, we conﬁrmed that
non-conditioned ﬁsh would avoid this elevated platform by testing a
group of ﬁsh conditioned to self-administer food but not pre-exposed to
hydrocodone.  For the testing session, apart for the change in the platform height, the assay was performed with the same parameters as
previously described.  With these animals, we observed a reduction in
the total number of triggering events at the elevated platform when
compared with an assay performed with the regular platform (Fig.  2A). 
Interestingly, there was no diﬀerence in the number of triggering events
measured at the inactive platform (Fig.  2A). 
When hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh were tested with the elevated
active platform, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the total number
of pump activations observed with the elevated platform versus the
regular platform (Fig.  2B).  This suggests that conditioned ﬁsh will actively cross the active platform despite an aversive condition.  Even
when the water depth above the active platform was further reduced to
≈50% of the initial level (triple platform), ﬁsh still visited the active
platform a signiﬁcantly higher number of times than the inactive
platform thus conﬁrming that ﬁsh are willing to overcome an aversive
condition to receive a dose of the drug. 
3. 2. 2.  Self-administration following a progressive ratio
As mentioned previously, in our assay, the animals were conditioned with a ﬁxed ratio, but to further establish that our assay is a bona
ﬁde self-administration assay, we decided to test a diﬀerent conditioning protocol: the progressive ratio [28,40–43].  In this assay, animals are required to perform an increasing number of actions in order
to receive a dose of the drug as opposed to the ﬁxed ratio where each
action triggers release of a dose.  For example, a mouse would be required to press a lever ﬁve times in order to activate the delivery of the
drug and this number is increased until the addicted animal gives up
and loses interest.  This value is called the break point for this particular
animal.  In most cases, the progressive ratio is tested with animals
previously trained with a ﬁxed ratio [44–46]. 
We thus tested progressive ratio training by modifying our python
script so the pump would only be activated after a variable number of
triggering events.  In other words, ﬁsh would have to swim across the
active platform multiple times to receive a single dose.  Using this
method is informative because if the ﬁsh simply developed a place
preference for the location of the active platform in the arena, the
number of motion events should not change and the ﬁsh should lose
interest if no drug is delivered.  We decided to test the progressive ratio
paradigm in our assay by setting the number of triggering events required to activate the pump to 5, 10, 15 and 20.  The number of triggering events required to activate the pump was increased on successive
days and not during the same session. 
We observed that conditioned ﬁsh increased their total number of
visits each time the number of triggering events required for a dose was
increased.  This trend was observed with 5 events/dose and became
signiﬁcant with 10 and 15 events/dose, but at 20 events/dose, the
diﬀerence was no longer signiﬁcant when compared to the ﬁxed ratio. 
As a result, there were about 4 times more triggering events detected at
the active platform for the 15 events/dose setting as compared with the
ﬁxed ratio (Fig.  2C).  Interestingly, the increase in triggering events
observed with the setting at 15 events/dose was such that the actual
dose received by the animals was similar to the dose received with 5
events/dose (Fig.  2D).  Furthermore, the fact that the number of visits
doesn’t increase at 20 events/dose suggests that this value could be
considered the break point for the group of ﬁsh tested. 
The increase in total triggering events detected with the progressive
ratio demonstrates that hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh are willing to
perform the required action multiple times to get a dose.  This result
combined with the administration despite an adverse consequence
suggests that the activation of the pump is not simply a conditioned
place preference but rather an active action to self-administer the drug. 
3. 3.  Evidence of withdrawal symptoms
Among the major hallmarks of drug addiction are the intense physical and psychological manifestations triggered by withdrawal from
the drug.  These include an increase in anxiety and stress levels in both
human and animal models, which are thought to promote continued
drug seeking in addicted patients [47].  In zebraﬁsh, previous studies
have demonstrated that withdrawal can cause profound physical
manifestation such as reduced exploration behavior, increased erratic
movements, changes in freezing behavior and changes in locomotion
[19,48].  We therefore investigated the behavior of conditioned ﬁsh
48 h after their last self-administered dose of hydrocodone in the Novel
Tank assay [19].  In this assay, ﬁsh are introduced into a new tank and
the behavior of the ﬁsh is recorded.  The inter-ﬁsh distance and the
patterns of swimming can be used as measures of anxiety and stress
level in zebraﬁsh [27,49–51]. 
Stress and anxiety have been shown to increase social cohesion in
zebraﬁsh [31,52].  We therefore analyzed the eﬀect of withdrawal on
shoaling by measuring the distance between each ﬁsh in a group of
three ﬁsh for a period of ﬁve minutes.  Hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh
had an average distance of 4. 32 cm as compared to 5. 92 cm for naïve
animals.  Thus, as hypothesized, ﬁsh undergoing withdrawal from hydrocodone form a tighter group than naïve animals (Fig.  3). 
We also measured the exploration behavior of the ﬁsh by analyzing
the time spent swimming in the center of the tank versus the outer area. 
Stressed animals have been shown to exhibit reduced exploration of a
novel environment [19].  As expected, zebraﬁsh undergoing withdrawal
displayed reduced exploration behavior as evidenced by a longer latency to explore the outer area of the tank as it took an extra 103 s for
the conditioned group to enter the outer area (Fig.  4B).  In accordance
with this result, hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh had a lower number of
visits in the outer area resulting in a shorter total visit time (Fig.  4C andThe results suggest that conditioned ﬁsh in withdrawal display signs
of stress and anxiety as demonstrated by tighter shoals and reduced
exploration activity.  This increase in stress during withdrawal further
supports the idea that conditioned zebraﬁsh develop an addiction to
hydrocodone. G. D.  Bossé, R. T.  Peterson
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 158–166
Fig.  2.  Hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh displayed evidence of self-administration.  A: Non-conditioned animals generated fewer triggering events at the active platform with the double
stacked platforms (n = 8).  B: There was no diﬀerence detected between the regular and the double stacked platform with the conditioned ﬁsh (n > 6).  C: Hydrocodone-conditioned ﬁsh
can be conditioned with a progressive ratio; animals signiﬁcantly increased the number of triggering events at the active platforms with 10–15 events required to activate the pump, but
not at 5 and 20 events.  D: The doses of drug received by the animals under the diﬀerent progressive ratio conditions are lower than with a ﬁxed ratio but similar across the diﬀerent
settings.  Error bar represents conﬁdence coeﬃcient of 95%.  *p-value < 1. 99 E-19, ** p-value < 1. 7e-7, *** p-value < 0. 05, # p-value < 0. 01. 
3. 4.  Molecular characterization of the assay
All drugs of abuse share some similar modes of action, and one of
the reasons for their addictive potential is the fact that they target the
natural brain reward system.  This system relies heavily on two major
neurotransmitters: dopamine and glutamate [53,54].  Dopamine is released in the brain upon activation of the reward system and is responsible for the sensation of pleasure [55].  Many drugs of abuse directly inﬂuence the release or recycling of dopamine, thus enhancing
the association between the drug and a positive experience [56,57].  It
has been shown that blocking the dopamine pathway can reduce drug
seeking in other animal models [11,58]. 
On the other hand, glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter that
signals through two majors receptors, the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor and the N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor [59].  As with dopamine, it has been shown that the
glutamate pathway is required for drug seeking [53]. 
Because of their crucial roles in addiction processes, we decided to
Fig.  3.  Hydrocodone-conditioned animals in withdrawal form a tighter
group.  The average distance between pairs of conditioned animals (cm) is
shorter than naïve animals.  Naïve groups n = 15, conditioned animals
groups n = 10.  Error bar represents a 95% conﬁdence coeﬃcient.  pvalue < 0. 05. G. D.  Bossé, R. T.  Peterson
Behavioural Brain Research 335 (2017) 158–166
Fig.  4.  Hydrocodone-conditioned animals in withdrawal had a reduced exploration rate in the novel tank assay.  A: Representative heat map of the location of the ﬁsh in the tank.  B:
Conditioned animals had a longer latency (seconds) to enter the outer area of the tank.  C: The total number of visit in the outer area was smaller for these animals.  D: Animals in
withdrawal also spend less time (seconds) in the outer area of the tank than naïve animals.  Naïve groups n = 15, conditioned groups n = 10.  Error bar represents a 95% conﬁdence
coeﬃcient.  *p-value < 0. 05. 
Fig.  5.  The dopamine and glutamate pathways are
required for drug seeking in zebraﬁsh.  Treatment
with the dopamine receptor antagonist SCH-23390
(10 μM) [16], the NMDA receptor antagonist, MK801 (20 μM) [68–70] and Ketamine (20 mg/L) [71]
or the AMPA receptor antagonist CNQX (10 μM)
[72], abolished the preference for the active platform.  Untreated groups n = 41, SCH-23390 groups
n = 5, MK-801 groups n = 4, ketamine groups = 5,
CNQX groups n = 4. 