
in recognizing others’ emotional expressions
Facial expressions of emotion represent a crucial component of
interaction, allowing the observer to infer another's
human social
emotional state (Frith, 2009; Keltner, 2003), and adjust their behaviour
accordingly (Blair, 2003).  Children and adults aﬀected by disorders of
social and aﬀective functioning, including psychopathy, often show
diﬃcultiesO’Kearney, McKone, & Palermo, 2012; Marsh & Blair, 2008).  When categorizing expressions, attention is typically directed toward criticalthe mouth
(Eisenbarth & Alpers, 2011; Wells, Gillespie, & Rotshtein, 2016).  A
failure to attend to these regions may lead to diﬃculties in judging the
expressed emotion.  Although psychopathic traits in children and nonoﬀenders are associated with atypical eye scan paths for emotional
faces (Dadds, El Masry, Wimalaweera, & Guastella, 2008; Gillespie,
Rotshtein, Wells, Beech, & Mitchell, 2015), these relationships are yet to
be tested in a forensic sample. and
features, mostthe
Psychopathy is best understood as a collection of personality traits
that vary along a continuum in the general population (Coid, Yang,
Ullrich, Roberts, & Hare, 2009).  These traits include elevated levels of
antisocial behaviour, a callous disregard for others, and a deceitful and
manipulative interpersonal style (Hare, 2003), and are often prominent
in clinical and forensic samples (Skeem, Polaschek, Patrick, & Lilienfeld,
2011).  A triarchic conceptual framework describes psychopathy along
three core dimensions
that have been reliably identiﬁed and
distinguished in clinical and non-clinical samples, namely Boldness,
Meanness, and Disinhibition (Patrick, Fowles, & Krueger, 2009).  Boldness refers to psychologically adaptive traits emphasised by Cleckley
(1941), and includes venturesomeness, fearlessness, and interpersonal
dominance (Patrick Name, 2009).  Boldness explains a key diﬀerence
between psychopathy and antisocial personality disorder [ASPD] (Wall,
Wygant, & Sellbom, 2015), and contributes over and above Meanness
and Disinhibition to the prediction of clinical psychopathy (Venables,
Hall, & Patrick, 2014).  Meanness entails a callous disregard for others,
empathy problems, and a tendency toward exploiting others
(Drislane & Patrick, 2016).  The Disinhibition dimension refers to impulse control problems, emotional reactivity, poor behavioural restraint, and irresponsibility (Patrick Name, 2009). 
Several prominent accounts of psychopathy emphasise the presence
of emotion recognition impairments in relation to the fearless and unempathic features (e. g. 