I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Although speakers and addressees have a large repertoire of conventional lexical meanings, they can go beyond these to communicate a seemingly indeﬁnite number of context-dependent meanings.  Metonymy is one case of this, where an expression is used to refer to something that falls outside its conventional denotation, with a clear associative relation linking the conventional denotation and the contextually determined, metonymic one.  Consider Nunberg’s () classic example in ().  () The ham sandwich left without paying.  Uttered by one waiter to another in a restaurant, the expression the ham sandwich refers to the customer who ordered the ham sandwich, and exploits the immediate accessibility (or salience) of the associative relation between the customer and his order.  Another common case is the use of names of artists or authors to refer to their works, as in Woolf is on the top shelf.  While such metonymic uses by adults are common, little is known about how metonymy is understood or used by children.  Do young children understand the pragmatics of metonymy, and do they use metonyms themselves.  If so, when does this ability emerge in development.  Children rely early on their pragmatic abilities in word learning, and are sensitive to speaker intentions (Bloom, ), discourse status (Akhtar, Carpenter & Tomasello, ), and speakers’ word choices (Clark, ).  Young children also make use of context in interpreting class extensions (Bushnell & Maratsos, ), polysemy (Rabagliati, Marcus & Pylkkänen, ), and, under some conditions, metaphors (Özçaliskan, ) and scalar terms (Papafragou & Musolino, .  but see also Noveck, ).  Does this early pragmatic skill extend to metonymy.  In this study, we investigate how three- to ﬁve-year-olds understand and produce novel metonyms.  We tested their ability to understand and explain metonymic meanings in a comprehension task designed for their level of world knowledge and linguistic skill.  We also looked at their ability to produce metonyms in two tasks.  In the ﬁrst, we focused on their use of metonymy as a shorthand device, and in the second, on its use in naming animates based on a salient property.  Evidence that young children can manage metonymic meanings would support the view that preschool children start to use ﬁgurative language early, along with some of the relevant pragmatic inferences.  The pragmatics of metonymy.  We can distinguish between two kinds of metonymy.  referential metonymy, which relates one entity with another (e. g.  The ham sandwich for ‘The customer who ordered the ham sandwich’, as in () above), and propositional metonymy, which relates two propositions (e. g.  The athlete made it to the podium for ‘The athlete won a medal’) (Warren, ).  In this study, we focus on referential metonymy.  The primary communicative function of referential metonymy is usually taken to be that of economizing on processing eﬀort in making a reference.  On this view, a metonym is a shorthand for a more elaborate expression, and the aim is quick and easy referent identiﬁcation (Lakoﬀ & Johnson, .  Nunberg, .  Papafragou, ).  Metonymy as a shorthand device diﬀers from linguistic abbreviation (or ellipsis), where actual words are omitted (e. g.  uttering The Commons for The House of Commons), in that it picks out a salient aspect of a referent to ‘stand for’ the referent as a whole, and is therefore sometimes described as a form of “cognitive abbreviation” (Nerlich & Clarke, , p.  ).  A metonymic shorthand of course also involves a kind of linguistic abbreviation in the sense that, in most cases, there exists a readily available paraphrase (e. g.  The ham sandwich vs.  The customer who ordered the ham sandwich).  however, it does not involve actual linguistic ellipsis.  Referential metonymy is often described as a ‘regular’ process, where metonymic expressions instantiate underlying patterns, either in the form of stable conceptual associations (so-called ‘conceptual metonymy’.  cf.  Lakoﬀ & Johnson, .  Radden & Kövecses, ) or even as the result of some kind of (lexical) rule (Apresjan, .  Copestake & Briscoe, .  Frisson & Pickering, ).  For example, the metonymic relation PRODUCER FOR PRODUCT is productive and makes it possible to understand the utterance John likes to read Needham as referring to books written by the author Needham, even though we might have never heard of this author before (Frisson & Pickering, ).  How are such metonymic patterns acquired.  And are children as sensitive to them as adults.  Our preliminary analyses of conversational interactions between children and their caregivers from the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, ) suggested that one productive metonymic pattern available to young children is COMPONENT FOR GAME, linguistically realized as play NP, as in Let’s play (the) zebras (‘the game that has zebras as a salient component’).  Metonymy, then, could well serve early on as a productive referential strategy for young children.  While much has been said about metonymy as a shorthand referential device in the theoretical literature, another communicative function of referential metonymy has received less attention, namely its use to highlight a particular property of the referent, thereby giving rise to a slight (sometimes witty or playful) deprecation of the referent (e. g.  The big mouth is coming to the meeting).  In these cases, referential metonymy serves as a naming device, much as nicknames do, where a salient property of an individual or object is used to create a new name (Papafragou, ).  While the use of (derogatory) metonymic nicknames (e. g.  Four Eyes, Chubby, Skinny Bones, etc. ) is well documented among primary school children (Crozier & Dimmock, ), little is known about its use among preschoolers.  Use of metonyms with a naming function might require more metalinguistic ability than simple shorthand uses, since the speaker replaces a conventional term with a new one to achieve a certain eﬀect.  Children’s metonymic skills.  In metonymy, salient associative relations (typically, relations of contiguity) are exploited for the purpose of communication.  The ability to identify such relations is present early on.  Categorization studies show that hierarchical classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of (part–whole) contiguity relations emerge early in the preschool years (Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson & Boyes-Braem, ).  Also, many of children’s early referential strategies exploit salient associative relations, and thus have an aﬃnity with metonymy.  Some iconic gestures made by infants bear a part–whole, ‘metonymic’ relation to the meaning represented, e. g.  clapping hands for ‘baseball game’, smacking lips for ‘food’, and so on (Acredolo & Goodwyn, .  Kendon, .  Mittelberg, ).  This is also true of some early referring expressions, e. g.  onomatopoeias such as bow-wow for ‘dog’, and vroom-vroom for ‘vehicle’, and some strategies young children use to ﬁll gaps in their vocabulary.  For instance, overextensions based on perceptual, spatio-temporal, and functional contiguity (e. g.  toy for ‘a bag which habitually contains toys’, cf.  Huttenlocher & Smiley, ), could be viewed as precursors to metonymy (Nerlich, Clarke & Todd, ).  Also, when children coin new words, one highly productive strategy they rely on in English is zero-derivation, that is, the use of nouns as verbs (e. g.  to gun for ‘to shoot’).  Children begin to rely on this option as young as age two (Bushnell & Maratsos, .  Clark, ).  These lexical innovations appear to follow the ‘metonymic’ rule that almost any noun denoting an object can be used as a verb for talking about some state, process, or activity associated with that object (Clark & Clark, .  Schönefeld, ).  Another productive operation for coining nouns is compounding, and young English-speaking children frequently construct novel root compounds for subcategories (Clark, Gelman & Lane, .  see also Konieczna & Kleparski, ), some of which could be metonymically motivated (e. g.  clown-boy for ‘the boy who is a clown’, daddy-seed for ‘the seed that is a daddy’), highlighting a salient characteristic of the entity in question.  In short, since even very young children exploit salient associative relations for the purpose of communication, the main prerequisite for metonymy use appears to be present early on.  Does metonymy serve acommunicative function similar to other early referential strategies attested in compensating for vocabulary gaps and/or limited expressive ability.  Note that the notion of metonymy used throughout this paper is broader than the one assumed by classical rhetoric, where the speaker is seen as consciously ‘replacing’ a conventional, literal expression with a related metonymic one.  Instead, we follow contemporary pragmatic theory which, drawing on theoretical arguments and evidence from psycholinguistic studies, rejects such a sharp distinction between ﬁgurative and literal utterances and proposes that ﬁgurative utterances, which arise naturally and spontaneously for purposes of communication, exploit features that also occur in a range of ordinary ‘literal’ utterances (Wilson & Sperber, ).  In referential metonymy, the speaker exploits accessible associative links in making a reference.  In this way, a use of what we call a ‘referential metonym’ would depend on the ability to recognize and make use of such associative links in identifying a referent, but would not necessarily have to involve knowledge of the conventional term for the intended referent (though this would typically be the case in more sophisticated uses).  Figurative language development.  metaphor and metonymy.  Most research on ﬁgurative language development has focused on children’s ability to produce and understand metaphor (e. g.  John is a lion), a matter of debate for several decades (see Gibbs, , for a review).  Earlier studies observed that children tended to interpret metaphors literally, and concluded that metaphor comprehension was a complex skill that did not emerge until late in development (e. g.  Asch & Nerlove, .  Billow, .  Winner, Rosenstiel & Gardner, ).  Some researchers also proposed that there is a ‘literal stage’ in ﬁgurative language development, characterized by a tendency towards literal interpretations, before children attain a more sophisticated level of ﬁgurative use (e. g.  Levorato & Cacciari, .  Winner, /).  However, more recent studies suggest that the lack of comprehension found in earlier studies of metaphor may have resulted from the complexity of the tasks, and in fact attest to an early metaphoric ability in both comprehension and production, emerging during the preschool years (see Deamer, .  Gottfried, .  Özçalışkan, .  Pouscolous, ).  Few studies have explored children’s metonymic skill directly, and, to the best of our knowledge, none has investigated preschoolers’ ability to produce metonyms.  In one comprehension study with a forced-choice task, Nerlich et al.  () found that four- and ﬁve-year-olds outperformed two- and three-year-olds, but both groups did better when they received ‘clues’ that made the association between the literal and metonymic reference explicit.  Another study compared comprehension of metonyms and metaphors with conventional ﬁgurative meanings, from age ﬁve to thirty-seven years (Rundblad & Annaz, ).  Overall performance improved with age, but comprehension developed more slowly for metaphors than for metonyms.  This was interpreted as supporting the view that metonymy is more basic, cognitively, than metaphor.  <Middle> These studies.  raise a general methodological question.  Were the researchers in fact measuring vocabulary the children had already acquired or their pragmatic skill with metonyms.  When children acquire lexicalized metonyms (e. g.  Lego, where the name of the brand is used to refer to the toy bricks), they do not necessarily make the association that renders the metonym transparent.  rather, the metonym could be acquired as a conventional term for the referent in question – only later willthey learn that Lego is a brand name.  While understanding a novel metonym requires pragmatic skill and relies on contextual knowledge to license the metonymic association, comprehension of a lexicalized metonym may simply depend on whether the child has already acquired its conventional meaning.  A recent study investigated novel metonym and metaphor comprehension and found that comprehension increased with age, with some metonyms and metaphors understood even by the youngest participants, aged three (Van Herwegen, Dimitriou & Rundblad, ).  This suggests an early-emerging pragmatic capacity for dealing with novel ﬁgurative meanings, thus supporting recent results on metaphors.  While providing some insight into the metonymic ability of preschoolers, this study mainly aimed at comparing the long-term developmental trajectories of novel metonym and metaphor understanding in typically developing individuals and individuals with Williams syndrome.  To gain a clearer picture of metonymic ability, we need research on preschoolers’ comprehension and production of metonyms.  Hypotheses.  We began this research with the following expectations.  .  Given the evidence of some early ﬁgurative language ability in young children, we expected that, if children were presented with novel metonyms in a context where the underlying association was perceptually available and primed by the linguistic context, they should be able to understand some novel metonyms.  We also expected children to get better at interpreting and explaining metonymic meanings with age (Task ).  .  Given their attested early ability to make use of salient associative relations for communicative purposes, combined with some ﬁgurative understanding, we expected children to be able to produce some metonyms at an early age.  Our ﬁrst elicitation task was designed to test whether referential metonymy oﬀered children a strategy for referring with shorthands rather than ‘more literal’, descriptive phrases that might be more demanding syntactically or conceptually (Task ).  Metonymy might be a more economical alternative in planning terms, by allowing children to seize on a salient property of the referent with which to pick out the whole. 