Prosody plays an important part in the production and comprehension of the organization of speech, manifested by patterns of intonation, rhythm, prominence, and chunking of the speech continuum.  Several form–meaning relations are established or contributed to by prosody, namely, sentence type distinctions, the highlighting of important information, the demarcation of speech units (also known as phrasing), and different kinds of affective meanings (Halliday, 1967.  Ladd, 2008).  Many prosodic form–meaning relations convey linguistic meanings, that is, meanings related to the message, such as interrogativity, ﬁnality, or focus, which may (or not) be grammaticalized in different languages and in different ways (Gussenhoven, 2002, 2016).  For example, interrogativity tends to be signaled by high or rising pitch, and ﬁnality by low pitch (as in English or Portuguese), but in Swedish a ﬁnal low tone is used both in statements and questions.  focus in West Germanic languages is typically achieved by the presence of a pitch contour in the prominent element (accentuation) and absence of accentuation on words that follow the prominent element, whereas other languages may use different types of accents to contrast focused and unfocused words (such as Portuguese.  Frota, 2014).  Other prosodic form–meaning relations express meanings related to the state of the speaker, such as the affective meanings of (un)happy or (un)cooperative, which tend to be less arbitrary and thus less language speciﬁc (Gussenhoven,Given the broad role played by prosody, it is not surprising that it has taken a leading role in spoken communication and language development.  Prosodic skills have been shown to be essential for language acquisition, and it is known that children have the ability to understand differences conveyed by prosodic features from birth and to use prosody to extract relevant information for lexical and syntactic analysis early in development (e. g. , Gervain & Mehler, 2010.  H¨ohle, 2009.  Morgan & Demuth 1996).  At the same time, however, certain domains/functions of prosody do not seem to be mastered in an adultlike fashion before puberty, such as prosodic comprehension skills involved in chunking, or the prosodic abilities required to understand or produce ﬁnal focus in English and Dutch (e. g. , Chen, 2011.  Wells, Pepp´e, & Goulandris, 2004).  Furthermore, prosody can be impaired in a large number of clinical populations with language or communication problems, such as speciﬁc language disorders (e. g. , Wells & Pepp´e, 2003), deafness (e. g. , Parker & Rose, 1990), Down syndrome (e. g. , Heselwood, Bray, & Crookston, 1995), Williams syndrome (e. g. , Catterall, Howard, Stojanovik, Szczerbinski, & Wells, 2006), aphasia (e. g. , Seddoh, 2004), schizophrenia (e. g. , Pascual, Sol´e, Castill´on, Abad´ıa, & Tejedor, 2005), epilepsy (e. g. , Sanz-Mart´ın, Guevara, CorsiCabrera, Ondarza-Rovira, & Ramos-Loyo, 2006), and autism spectrum disorders (e. g. , Baltaxe & Simmons, 1985.  Filipe, Frota, Castro, & Vicente, 2014.  Filipe, Frota, Villagomez, & Vicente, 2016).  It is important to note that although the functions of prosody tend to be quite general across languages, prosodic systems are known to vary considerably, and prosodic cues are strikingly language speciﬁc (Frota & Prieto, 2015a.  Jun, 2005, 2014.  Ladd, 2008).  Therefore, studies focusing on different languages are critical for cross-linguistic comparisons, which in turn are necessary for a better understanding of prosodic development and prosodic impairments.  These are strong reasons for prosodic skills to be more widely studied in typical and impaired language development.  European Portuguese (EP) poses challenging questions for the study of language development, due to the atypical prosodic proﬁle of the language.  EP includes properties of both Romance and Germanic languages in its phonology and prosody.  EP prosody combines typical Romance properties with Germaniclike properties.  Unlike Spanish, the rhythm of EP is characterized by a mix of syllable-timed and stress-timed features, thus combining Romance-like syllable timing with Germanic-like stress timing (Frota & Vig´ario, 2001).  EP displays a clear cluster of cues to signal the beginnings and ends of words, like English and other Germanic languages, but at the same time allows for ﬁnal word consonants to take the initial position of the following word (resyllabiﬁcation) as in Romance languages (Vig´ario, 2003).  The intonation contours of EP are characterized by sparse accentuation.  that is, they show fewer tonal events than in Spanish or other Romance languages, approximating the hat pattern contour characteristic of Dutch (Frota, 2014).  However, like Spanish, there is no deaccenting of the sort found in West Germanic languages when the prominence is not ﬁnal in the utterance (Frota, 2014.  Frota & Prieto, 2015b).  In addition, unlike in English, pitch accent placement is not the critical means to express focus.  In Romance languages several strategies may apply to convey narrow/contrastive focus depending on the language/variety, namely, the use of a particular type of pitch accent, sometimes with the presence of postnuclear accents, or changes in word order (Frota, 2014.  Ladd, 2008).  In the case of EP, all the Romance-like strategies have been reported to apply, with the prosodic focus strategy signaled by a particular type of accentuation being the most frequently used by Standard EP speakers (Fernandes, 2007.  Frota, 2000, 2014).  In short, EP stands as an interesting case for the study of prosodic development, with cross-linguistic implications for the understanding of developmental paths for form–meaning relations in different languages, as well as for the understanding of prosodic impairments.  Research on prosodic skills requires the development of tools to assess prosody in a systematic and comprehensive way adapted to the speciﬁcities of the language observed.  The use of diverse methodologies of prosodic assessment may lead to contradictory ﬁndings and/or to ﬁndings that cannot be compared (McCann & Pepp´e, 2003.  Pepp´e et al. , 2010).  There are presently few procedures available to assess prosodic abilities.  For instance, in the United Kingdom, there is the Prosody Proﬁle (Crystal, 1982), which depends on the transcription of the intonation of spontaneous speech samples.  In the United States, the Prosody-Voice Screening Proﬁle is used, also requiring transcription, for the assessment of spoken language in seven domains, three of which are prosodic domains.  phrasing, speech rate, and stress (Shriberg, Kwiatkowski, & Rasmussen, 1990).  In Sweden, the Swedish procedure is used to evaluate prosody at the word, phrase, and discourse levels (Samuelsson, Scocco, & Nettelbladt, 2003).  However, none of these instruments assesses prosodic discrimination and comprehension of meaning differences conveyed by prosodic features.  The only test available to examine both receptive and expressive prosodic abilities in children over 4 years of age is the Proﬁling Elements of Prosody in Speech-Communication (PEPS-C.  Pepp´e & McCann, 2003) developed in the United Kingdom.  The PEPS-C has the following advantages.  (a) transcription skills of both lexical and prosodic elements are not needed.  (b) samples of speech are elicited in a homogeneous way across subjects and types of populations.  (c) the content of responses is the same for all participants.  (d) instructions are suitable for individuals who may have low cognitive level.  and (e) it may provide a systematic and comparable way to assess prosodic abilities in different languages.  Originally, the PEPS-C only assessed prosody in adults (Pepp´e, Maxim, & Wells, 2000), but it was revised in 2004 and norms for typically developing children were collected (Wells et al. , 2004).  Subsequently, it has been adapted to different languages, such as Spanish, Flemish, French, and Norwegian (Pepp´e et al. , 2010).  Given the absence of a procedure for the assessment of Portuguese prosody throughout the school years, and the lack of studies on EP prosodic development covering this age range, we adapted an English test (the PEPS-C) for use with EP speakers.  With the Portuguese version of the PEPS-C, we analyzed the developmental changes of several components of prosody between 5 years of age and adulthood.  The PEPS-C includes tasks at two levels.  formal and functional.  The formal level assesses auditory discrimination and production abilities (related to perceptual and motor skills) required to perform the tasks.  The functional level takes into account four prosodic functions (related to cognitive understanding and expression) organized in the four subtests affect, turn-end, chunking, and focus.  The affect subtest is associated with the expression of feelings or emotions, that is, with affective meanings in the sense of Gussenhoven (2016.  for instance, a more prolonged and high intonation suggests positive affects, as shown in Banse & Scherer, 1996).  Speciﬁcally, it uses the difference between like and dislike intonation.  As the intonation patterns used in the expression of liking and disliking in EP were largely unknown, a study was performed to provide a systematic account of these prosodic patterns (Filipe, Branco, Frota, Castro, & Vicente, 2015).  The results showed that, as in English, in EP the meaning of liking is expressed by rise–fall pitch movements.  However, for disliking, the EP results showed a more ﬂat melodic pattern with a fall in the stressed syllable.  These ﬁndings have shown that the intonation patterns for liking and disliking exhibit differences across languages (namely, in English, Spanish, and EP), highlighting the language speciﬁcity of prosodic contours even in the expression of affective meanings.  The other three subtests examine linguistic meanings.  The turn-end subtest uses the differences between interrogative and declarative intonation.  In EP, as in English, interrogatives are expressed by rising intonation, whereas declaratives are marked by falling intonation (e. g. , Frota, 2002).  However, unlike in English, which uses word order together with prosody to differentiate interrogatives from declaratives, in EP the interrogative/declarative distinction is crucially marked by prosody only (Frota, 2002.  Frota, Butler, & Vig´ario, 2014.  Mateus et al. , 2003).  The chunking subtest relates to the prosodic cues that disambiguate the syntactic structure of what is being said (e. g. , the segmentation of utterances marked by prosodic features, such as pauses).  The chunking function is expressed through similar prosodic correlates in English and EP, as EP resorts to ﬁnal lengthening, pitch movement, and pauses (e. g. , Fal´e, 2005.  Frota, 2000.  Vig´ario, 2003).  However, languages may weigh the various prosodic cues for chunking differently (Seidl & Cristia, 2008.  Wellmann, Holzgrefe, Truckenbrodt, Wartenburger, & H¨ohle, 2012), and there are no studies on cue weighting for EP.  The focus subtest uses prominence to signal the element that carries more informative load, that is, the element that is highlighted in the utterance.  Previous work on prosodic focus in EP had shown that the prosodic strategy (i. e. , placement of main prominence and use of a particular pitch accent) is frequently used by Standard EP speakers (Fernandes, 2007.  Frota, 2000, 2014).  As in English, contrastive focus in EP is generally expressed by means of prominence and intonation, although in important different ways.  In English, pitch accent placement, together with deaccenting of given (i. e. , nonfocused elements) are the main strategies used.  in EP, focus is expressed by choice of pitch accent type and there is no systematic deaccenting of nonprominent material (e. g. , Frota, 2000).  The description of the prosodic system of EP has advanced during the last few years (see Frota, 2014, for a review), and there has been recent work in the ﬁeld of prosodic acquisition both in early perception and in production (Butler, Vig´ario, & Frota, 2016.  Frota et al. , 2014.  Frota, Matos, Cruz, & Vig´ario, 2016).  The adaptation of a test such as the PEPS-C to assess EP prosodic development from preschool through adulthood will allow new studies covering prosodic development.  Therefore, the current study intends to (a) describe the adaptation of the PEPS-C to EP, (b) examine the typical developmental trajectory of several aspects of EP prosody after the age of 5, and (c) compare the results obtained with ﬁndings reported by other studies using comparable methodologies for other languages.  Thus, this paper aims to address the following two research questions.  1.  How do receptive and expressive prosodic abilities of EP speakers change from childhood to adulthood.  Speciﬁcally, we analyzed prosodic abilities assessed by the PEPS-C.  to discriminate and produce short and long prosodic utterances, as well as the use of prosody to signal affect patterns (i. e. , the expression of liking and disliking), to indicate sentence-type distinctions (i. e. , interrogative vs.  declarative), to mark speech chunks (i. e. , the distinction between simple and compound nouns, or different groupings of properties that qualify nouns), and to highlight (focus on) a particular word.  The typical developmental data obtained may serve as a basis for comparison with speciﬁc clinical populations.  2.  Are developmental trajectories in EP between 5 and 20 years of age similar to those that have been described for English and Spanish speakers.  in other words, do we ﬁnd similar milestones.  Using the PEPS-C, Wells et al.  (2004) found that for English some prosodic skills are present by the age of 5, while other abilities continue to develop until the age of 11.  Results for the Spanish PEPS-C (Mart´ınez-Castilla & Pepp´e, 2008) showed that after the age of 7, every age group performed above chance level being near or reaching ceiling scores, except for the expression of focus, and that scores continued to rise with age especially for the chunking and focus subtests.  A comparison of the results from the English PEPS-C and the Spanish PEPS-C showed that the developmental paths and the degree of differences across age groups was not similar for all tasks, in particular for the chunking and the focus tasks, with Spanish speakers reaching above chance performance later than English speakers.  As EP includes properties of both Romance and Germanic languages in its prosody, the question arises as to whether developmental paths for Portuguese speakers will approximate those of Spanish or of English speakers, or will show a mix pattern depending on the form–meaning relation and task.  <Middle>Participants.  A total of 131 typically developing participants (ages 5 to 20 years.  78 females) were recruited.  The sample included 10 age groups (see Table 1).  5-year-olds, 6-year-olds, 7-year-olds, 8-year-olds, 9-year-olds, 10- to 11-year-olds, 12- to 13year-olds, 14- to 15-year-olds, 16- to 17-year-olds, and 18- to 20-year-olds.  All participants met our inclusion criteria.  (a) they were native speakers of EP, born and raised in monolingual homes in the north of Portugal.  (b) they had no signiﬁcant visual or hearing problems.  (c) they had no history of language and/or learning difﬁculties according to educators’ and/or parent reports.  and (d) they scored within the typical range in a vocabulary test (the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test.  Dunn & Dunn, 2007.  Portuguese adaptation and norms by Vicente, Sousa, & Silva, 2011) and in a nonverbal intelligence test (the Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices.  Raven, 1995.  Portuguese adaptation and norms by Sim˜oes, 2000).  The recruitment of participants was in accordance with the ethical principles that originated in the Declaration of Helsinki (developed by the World Medical Association).  Participants or caregivers of participants were selected via notices in schools.  All procedures described in this study were approved by the schools’ boards.  Informed consent was obtained from caregivers of participants under 18 years of age, and from the participants themselves if 18 or older, following Portuguese regulations.  Material.  The PEPS-C was used to evaluate the participants’ prosodic abilities.  This instrument includes tasks at two levels.  formal and functional.  The formal level assesses auditory discrimination and production abilities required to perform the tasks, whereas the functional level evaluates receptive (comprehension) and expressive (production) prosodic skills in four domains where prosody usually plays an important role.  (a) affect (liking vs.  disliking), (b) turn-end (questions vs.  statements), (c) chunking (prosodic phrasing), and (d) focus (contrastive stress conveyed by accent placement, i. e. , nuclear prominence on a particular word).  The distinction between formal and functional levels is also relevant as they can be differently affected.  Whereas some individuals have difﬁculties in mimicking and discriminating prosodic patterns (formal level), others have problems with understanding the meanings and producing the intended social or interactional meanings (functional level).  The PEPS-C runs though pictures that are presented successively on a laptop screen.  The instrument has 12 subtests, with a preliminary vocabulary check to conﬁrm that the vocabulary items used in the test are familiar to the participant.  Six of the subtests address receptive ability, and the other 6 expressive ability.  Each subtest begins with 2 examples and 2 training items, followed by 16 experimental items (the maximum score for each subtest is 16).  The receptive tasks present binary choices with low working-memory requirements, resulting in two possible responses, whereas the expressive tasks require the production of speech and are open to more response possibilities.  All the stimuli were selected on the basis of appropriateness of cultural meaning, a high degree of familiarity, and ease of pronunciation.  The EP version of the PEPS-C generally follows the structure of the original English battery, as all the communicative functions evaluated are found in both languages.  Furthermore, it is essential to build similar versions when one of the goals is cross-linguistic comparison.  However, the adaptation also included some modiﬁcations in order to address different uses of prosody in EP.  The following paragraphs present a short description of the adaptation process, including the modiﬁcations introduced.  Detailed information about the original and the Portuguese version of the PEPS-C can be found in Appendix A, and a full description of the original version can be found at http. //www. peps-c. com/.  As mentioned, the ﬁrst test in the PEPS-C is a vocabulary check.  In addition, the Portuguese version includes a routine to check the understanding of facial expressions, to avoid any bias on the performance in the affect subtest, which resorts to the interpretation of facial expressions of like and dislike.  Prosodic skills at the formal level (that correspond to the acoustic and auditoryperceptual characteristics of the signal, such as the F0 features of the melodic pattern) are assessed in two subtests.  1.  Short-item, receptive, and expressive tasks.  Aim.  To assess the ability to perceive and imitate intonation differences in items with one, two, or three syllables (e. g. , “P ˆERA” “pear”).  The receptive stimuli have no lexical information.  Receptive task.  The task consists of same/different trials, in which two sounds are presented, and the participant indicates whether the sounds are the same or different, by clicking on a symbol for “same” (two red circles) or one for “different” (a red circle and green square).  The original version uses laryngeal recordings (i. e. , signals made by recording sounds from the larynx only, having no lexical information) as stimuli.  However, in the Portuguese version shortitems from the turn-end and affect receptive tasks underwent low-pass ﬁltering (upper limit 500 Hz) using PRAAT software (Boersma & Weenink, 2011), and thus resulting in a different form of delexicalization that preserved the prosodic features.  Expressive task.  A sound stimulus is presented, and the participant imitates types of intonation from the turn-end and affect receptive tasks.  2.  Long-item, receptive and expressive tasks.  Aim.  To assess the ability to perceive and imitate prosodic differences in longitems, that is, items with six or seven syllables (e. g. , “PORTA, CHAVES E LEITE” “door, keys, and milk”).  Receptive and expressive tasks.  Same procedure as for short items.  however, the stimuli are from the chunking and focus receptive tasks.  The assessment of prosodic functions aimed to evaluate the pragmatic and linguistic meanings of prosody in communication.  As prosodic patterns can facilitate perceptual judgments by providing added meanings, a functional analysis is extremely important to understand the development of prosodic abilities.  Prosodic skills at the functional level are captured in four subtests, each with a receptive and an expressive dimension.  One of the subtests assesses form–meaning relations that express meanings related to the state of the speaker, namely, affective meanings.  the affect subtest.  The other three assess form–meaning relations at the linguistic level, that is, meanings related to the message conveyed.  turn-end, chunking, and1.  Affect, receptive and expressive tasks.  Aim.  To assess the ability to understand and produce the affective meanings of liking and disliking through intonation.  Receptive task.  A sound stimulus with a “liking” or a “disliking” intonation is presented simultaneously with the image representing the object mentioned.  Then two images appear, a happy and a sad face, and the participant has to select the image corresponding to the intonation pattern heard (smiley face for “liking” intonation or sad face for “disliking” intonation).  High-frequency stimuli are used with an acquisition age equal to or less than 5 selected through the written lexical databases PORLEX (Gomes & Castro, 2003) and CORLEX (Nascimento, Casteleiro, Marques, Barreto, & Amaro, 2009), as well as a study of age of acquisition of Portuguese words (Cameir˜ao & Vicente, 2010).  For the recording of the audio stimuli, and given that the intonation patterns used in the expression of liking and disliking in EP were largely unknown, a study was performed to provide a systematic account of these prosodic patterns (Filipe et al. , 2015).  The results show that, as in English, in EP liking has a pattern expressed by rise–fall pitch movements.  However, for disliking, the EP results show a more ﬂat melodic pattern with a fall in the stressed syllable.  Expressive task.  One picture of food appears on the screen, the participant is asked to produce “liking” or “disliking” intonation according to his/her own preference.  To show what they want to convey with the utterance produced, the participants point to a sad or happy face.  The stimuli follow the same criteria used for the receptive task.  Aim.  To assess the ability to understand and produce the intonation cues indicating interrogative versus declarative intonation.  Receptive task.  A declarative or interrogative pattern is presented, and the participant identiﬁes which is the pattern heard by selecting one of two pictures (i. e. , the participant chooses the picture of a child offering a food item when hearing an interrogative.  or the image of a child reading a book that contains the object mentioned when hearing a declarative).  The selected stimuli have one to three syllables in length, were within the semantic ﬁeld of food, and are highfrequency words with an acquisition age of 5 years or less (we used the lexical bases mentioned above).  The audio stimuli contain typical cues of questions and declaratives in the language.  In EP, as in English, questions are expressed by rising intonation, while declaratives are marked by falling intonation (e. g. , Frota,Expressive task.  One picture of food being offered or read out from a book page appears on the screen, and the participant says the item with suitable intonation (i. e. , interrogative or declarative pattern, respectively).  The stimuli follow the same criteria applied in the receptive task.  3.  Chunking, receptive, and expressive tasks.  Aim.  To assess the ability to understand and produce the delimitation of discourse into linguistic chunks, a process that reﬂects syntactic parsing and semantic processing (Wagner & Watson 2010).  Receptive task.  As in the original version, stimuli in combinations of three to six words are used.  The ﬁrst type of stimuli is related to the distinction between simple words and compound words.  The participant hears an auditory stimulus and has to select the correct picture from two possible pictures (each one representing two or three items, for instance.  ﬁsh-ﬁngers and fruit vs.  ﬁsh, ﬁngers, and fruit).  Unlike in English, many of the compound words used in the original version are formed using the particle “de” in Portuguese.  For example, the word “chocolate-cake” in Portuguese is “bolo de chocolate. ” However, there are Portuguese examples where prosody has a similar demarcative function differentiating compounds from lists of words.  Excluding all words not related to concrete objects, we select the following.  COUVE-FLOR, BOLOREI, SACO-CAMA, PEIXE-ESPADA, and PORTA-CHAVES “cauliﬂower, special Portuguese cake, sleeping bag, swordﬁsh, and key holder. ” The second type of stimuli consists of sentences with adjectives that differ in prosodic chunking, namely, the difference between pairs of socks with one or two colors.  The participant hears an auditory stimulus and has to select the correct picture from two possible pictures.  For example, the utterance MEIAS PRETAS E VERDES] E BRANCAS “black and green] and white socks,” with an internal boundary (]) after VERDES “green” but not after PRETAS “black,” denotes a pair of socks with two colors (black and green) and another pair of socks with one color (white).  Whereas MEIAS PRETAS] E VERDES E BRANCAS “black] and green and white socks,” with an internal boundary after PRETAS “black,” represents a pair of socks which are black, and another pair of socks with two colors (green and white).  Items included in the task are direct translations from English.  For the audiorecordings, the chunking function is expressed through similar prosodic correlates in English and EP, as EP resorts to ﬁnal lengthening, pitch movement, and pauses (e. g. , Fal´e, 2005.  Frota, 2000.  Vig´ario, 2003), but these prosodic cues may have different weights in different languages (Seidl & Cristia, 2008.  Wellmann et al. , 2012).  Expressive task.  The participant sees one picture and has to produce the sentence that prosodically matches the visual representation.  The stimuli follow the same criteria applied in the receptive task.  4.  Focus, receptive and expressive tasks.  Aim.  To assess the ability to understand and produce prominence to signal the element that carries more informative load.  Receptive task.  The following instruction is given “Earlier on today, the person on the computer bought some socks.  But when she got home, she realized she had forgotten to buy socks of one particular color.  Please point to the color of socks that the person has forgotten to buy. ” Then, two different colors appear on the screen, and the participant hears a sentence that varies in placement of main stress (e. g. , AZUIS E PRETAS “blue and black” with the word AZUIS “blue” carrying the main prominence).  The correct answer is the color they just heard with the main prominence, or focus.  Items included in the task are direct translations from English.  Expressive task.  A football game between cows and sheep was presented to the participants, and they see a picture and hear a sentence that do not match (e. g. , The black cow has the ball).  After, they have to correct the speaker (e. g. , No, the RED cow has the ball).  In the Portuguese version, some changes are introduced in the expressive task instructions.  Speciﬁcally, we remove the “NO” from the participant’s answer (i. e. , N ˜AO, A VACA VERDE TEM A BOLA “no, the green cow has the ball” is replaced by A VACA VERDE TEM A BOLA “the green cow has the ball”), because the initial “NO” often gets the main prominence of the sentence.  An example of an item of the expressive task is the following.  if the participant hears A OVELHA VERDE TEM A BOLA “the green sheep has the ball,” and is seeing a green cow with the ball, the task is to correct the error saying A VACA VERDE TEM A BOLA “the green COW has the ball” emphasizing the word VACA COW, that is, placing the main prominence on this word.  Because Mart´ınez-Castilla and Pepp´e (2008) found some problems in the Spanish version of the PEPS-C with respect to this task (i. e. , even adult participants did not show mastery of this function), we tested this version in a sample of 10 adult Portuguese speakers, and the results showed no difﬁculties in carrying out the task.  Furthermore, previous work on prosodic focus in EP had shown that the prosodic strategy (i. e. , placement of main prominence and use of a particular pitch accent) is frequently used by Standard EP speakers (Fernandes 2007.  Frota 2000, 2014).  The stimuli are direct translations of the English utterances.  The stimuli were recorded with a high-quality microphone (Audio-Technica ATM89) in a soundproof room in the Speech Laboratory at the University of Porto by a female speaker.  The software used was Pro Tools LE version 5. 1. 1 with 48-kHz sampling rate and 16-bit resolution.  The stimuli with the best recording quality, most unambiguous prosody, and clear articulation were selected according to the judgment of two of the authors.  The stimuli were considered unambiguous by 20 adult judges and were not rated as exaggerated or unnatural.  A Portable Digital Audio Recorder (Marantz PMD661) and a wireless microphone system (Sennheiser EW 152 G3-A-model 503102) were used to record participants’ performance on the PEPS-C expressive tasks.  We used SPSS version 20. 0 for the statistical analyses.  Procedure.  The administration of the PEPS-C was performed in one session lasting approximately 45 min.  Participants were assessed in school or at home in a quiet room with adequate lighting conditions.  The PEPS-C administration was conducted in PowerPoint on a computer screen, and the subtests order was the same for all the participants.  short-item, long item, turn-end, affect, chunking, and focus.  Half of the participants started with the receptive tasks and the other half with the expressive tasks.  RESULTS.  For the PEPS-C receptive tasks, the experimenter coded each participant’s answer online as correct (1 point) or incorrect (0 points).  For the PEPS-C expressive tasks, three raters judged each participant’s answers.  Raters (ages between 26 and 29 years.  2 females) had in common the fact that they speak EP as their mother tongue and the absence of any auditory or visual problems.  One had expertise in the ﬁeld of linguistics and was phonetically trained.  the others had expertise in the ﬁeld of the psychology of language.  For the affect and turn-end subtests, the raters had to categorize the answers within two possible alternatives.  liking versus disliking and statement versus question, respectively.  For the chunking subtest, the raters had two tasks.  (a) for the stimuli related to socks, they had to discriminate the socks of one color versus bicolor.  and (b) for the stimulus related to compound versus simple words, they had to decide if they heard a sentence formed by a compound word or a sentence formed only by single words.  For the focus subtest, they had to recognize where the focus was in a set of ﬁve possible alternatives.  Each participant’s answer was scored as correct (with 1 point) only when the three raters agreed in the classiﬁcation.  There was 91% overall agreement between the raters’ classiﬁcation.  Means and standard deviations for all the PEPS-C subtests (short-item, longitem, affect, turn-end, chunking, and focus) separately for receptive and expressive tasks and for age group are presented in Table 2, as well as the developmental trajectories for the PEPS-C receptive and expressive tasks in Figures 1 and 2, respectively.  No effects of presentation order were found.  We conducted an analysis of variance using difference and Helmert contrasts for each dependent variable to examine the degree of change in all the PEPS-C tasks with age (from 5 years to adulthood).  Particularly, the difference contrast compares each age group, except the ﬁrst, to the mean of the previous groups (i. e. , adult vs.  all children, 16- to 17-year-olds to all younger participants, 14- to 15-year-olds to all younger participants, etc. ).  The Helmert contrast compares each age group, except the last, to the mean of the subsequent groups (i. e. , 5-year-olds to all older participants, 6-yearolds to all older participants, and so on).  In addition, due to the high risk of chance performances (i. e. , score obtained if the participant performed at random) in the receptive tasks, we considered that participants reached above chance performance in a speciﬁc task if their score was at least 12 (75%).  Within the psycholinguistics approach adopted by the PEPS-C, ceiling effects or no differences between adult and children performances were understood as mastery of the skill assessed.  Receptive tasks. 