In language development, bilinguals often lag behind monolinguals of the same age.  Bilingual children are not delayed in all aspects of language development relative to monolingual children, but primarily those aspects linked to frequency of exposure in a particular language, such as vocabulary (see review in Nicoladis, ).  Bilingual children often score below the monolingual norm or below same-age monolinguals on vocabulary tests in at least one of their languages (Bialystok, Craik & Luk, .  Bialystok, Luk, Peets & Yang, .  Bialystok, Majumder & Martin, .  Junker & Stockman, .  Nicoladis, .  Oller, Pearson & CoboLewis, .  Uchikoshi, .  Umbel & Oller, .  Umbel, Pearson, Fernández & Oller, .  Verhallen & Schoonen, ).  Bilingual children and adults also show greater difficulty in lexical access (i. e.  they take longer or make mistakes when accessing specific words in the lexicon for production) than monolinguals (Gollan & Acenas, .  Gollan, Montoya, Cera & Sandoval, .  Yan & Nicoladis, ).  Importantly, limited vocabulary may lead to limitations on bilinguals’ communicative and conceptual skills (Keith & Nicoladis, .  Zareva, ).  The primary purpose of the present study was to investigate bilingual children’s strategies in choosing words in the context of a narrative task to document the strength of any relationship between linguistic (vocabulary) deficits, if they are found, and communicative and conceptual skills.  As we will detail below, many previous studies on lexical access have relied on experimental tasks, such as picture-naming or picture-based choice tests.  However, there is a discussion in the literature that these standard measures should be interpreted carefully because they are extremely impacted by different cultures and linguistic input (de Villiers, ).  Unlike these experimental tasks, in narrative tasks there is no necessary correct word.  Narratives rely heavily on imagery (Mallan, ) and are more cognitively complex than these common experimental tasks, given that narratives are intrinsically dependent on the story-teller’s causal thinking structure (Trabasso & Broek, ).  The choice of a term often reflects the story-teller’s conception of the story (Downing, ).  Downing showed that monolingual adults commonly used a basic kind term for most nouns when telling a story.  However, these adults deviated from basic terms when they were trying to convey an attitude or perspective on the story.  In narratives, it is more important to construct a story grammar, i. e.  the story-teller needs to represent the narrative events and describe the story units in a sequential order (Herman, .  Mandler, ), than to remember a particular word.  Therefore, the selection of what is important to remember and to retell relies on the relationships between narrative events and their representation of the story (Trabasso & Broek, ).  Although several authors have investigated the development of narratives in children (e. g.  Pearson, .  see also Verhoeven & Lundquist, ), none of them investigated lexical choice in terms of lexicon organization and strategies used to refer to target concepts.  As far as we know, Downing () was the only one who investigated lexical choice in narratives in such terms, and then only in a group of monolingual adults.  This dearth in the literature does not permit us to make clear predictions about how bilingual children, with greater lexical access difficulties, would choose words differently from monolingual children in the context of a narrative task.  Therefore, before we address the principal question guiding this research, we first propose two background studies to allow us to characterize how younger children (Study ) and adult late second language (L) learners (Study ) access words in a narrative context.  If bilingual children’s lexical choices resemble those of younger children, then they could be characterized as demonstrating developmental delay.  If their choices resemble those of the adult late L learners, then they could be characterized as demonstrating compensatory strategies, but not general communicative delay.  Conceptual delay in lexical access.  Some authors have proposed that lexical organization and retrieval reflect lexical development, and may be a fairer semantic assessment than acquired vocabulary (de Villers, .  Seymour, Roeper & de Villiers, ).  Previous studies have characterized lexical access differences between bilinguals and same-aged monolinguals as developmental delays (e. g.  Keith & Nicoladis, ).  If so, bilingual children with lexical access delay might resemble younger children in their way of choosing words to convey a story.  Study  compares three- to five-year-old and seven- to ten-year-old monolingual children.  We thought that younger children might be more likely than older children to omit target concepts, either because they cannot access them, or because their story grammars are still rudimentary (Hayes & Kelly, ).  If so, they might tell shorter stories (i. e.  use fewer word tokens to tell the story) and lexicalize fewer target words.  Another possible manifestation of conceptual delay could be observed in children’s lexical organization and the non-target word choices. 