The present study investigates cross-situational word learning in school-age foreign language (FL) learners.  Further, it takes an individual difference framework, exploring learner variables that may affect cross-situational learning in school-age FL learners.  FL learners constantly encounter ambiguous situations (Ely, 1989).  Ambiguity can occur in many aspects of a linguistic message, including sound pattern, word boundary, and/or word meaning.  Current pedagogical trends emphasize contextualized vocabulary learning in nonostensive contexts where words are mentioned but not directly taught.  Not all input needs to be comprehensible (White, 1987).  There are occasions when novel words are mentioned but not explicitly taught, rendering ambiguity in form to meaning mappings, such as listening to stories, shared book reading, watching videos, or following directions in the classroom.  In those ambiguous occasions, even when a word form is appropriately chunked from the continuous speech stream and encoded, a FL learner may still encounter multiple possible referents for that word.  For example, during shared storybook reading, young FL leaners may hear a novel word in a picture that depicts several objects that they cannot name yet.  While FL learners nowadays have a greater chance to learn words in a variety of nonostensive contexts, not much is known about how FL learners resolve referential ambiguity and what learner variables are associated with their ability to disambiguate a word’s meaning.  Children’s ability to make informed guesses about a word’s meaning in referentially ambiguous situations has been widely discussed and investigated in studies of ﬁrst language (L1) acquisition.  When the situation is highly constrained, for example, when there is only one name-unknown object, children seem to circumvent the problem of referential indeterminacy with some built-in biases.  They are more likely to map a novel name onto an object for which they do not have a label than an object for which they already have a name (e. g. , Au & Glusman, 1990.  Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Bailey, & Wenger, 1992.  Golinkoff, Mervis, & HirshPasek, 1994.  Markman & Wachtel, 1988.  Merriman & Bowman, 1989).  Such lexical biases have been consistently demonstrated in L1 children and are considered robust and fundamental in learning early L1 words (de Marchena, Eigsti, Worek, Ono, & Snedeker, 2011.  Golinkoff et al. , 1992).  This pattern of responses has been replicated in children learning a nonnative language (e. g. , Davidson & Tell, 2005.  Hu, 2012.  Kan & Kohnert, 2008.  Wilkinson & Mazzitelli, 2003).  For example, Hu (2012) found that when hearing a novel FL word in the presence of three objects, two name-known and one name-unknown, fourth-grade FL learners selected the name-unknown object as a referent for the novel word over 97% of the time.  Nevertheless, the above learning condition is highly constraining, with one novel word in the presence of one name-unknown referent.  Like L1 learners, FL learners also encounter situations where they hear multiple novel words in the presence of multiple name-unknown referents.  Do school-age FL learners make connections between FL-sounding words and referents in those situations.  WORD MAPPING ACROSS AMBIGUOUS SITUATIONS.  In recent years, researchers are interested in children’s ability to sort out potential word to referent associations across multiple ambiguous situations, known as cross-situational word learning.  Instead of one to one fast mapping through the application of some built-in lexical biases, the cross-situational word learning paradigm requires learners to track word-referent co-occurrence information across learning trials and evaluate co-occurrence probabilities across trials to determine the best-of-ﬁt mappings (e. g. , Scott & Fisher, 2012.  Smith & Yu, 2008.  Vlach & Johnson, 2013.  Yu & Smith, 2007).  Consider a situation in which a child hears a word clamp in the presence of multiple name-unknown objects.  The child cannot determine the referent of the word by applying the strategy of lexical biases.  However, the child can determine the referent of the word after hearing the word clamp in multiple situations where clamp consistently co-occurs with a particular type of object.  Studies on L1 learners have demonstrated that adults, children, and infants are able to determine the intended referent of a word across situations despite referential uncertainty in each situation (e. g. , Smith, Smith, & Blythe, 2011.  Suanda, Mugwanya, & Namy, 2014.  Vlach & Johnson, 2013.  Yu & Smith, 2007, 2011).  There is evidence that the processes involved in cross-situational learning undergo developmental changes (Fitneva & Christiansen, 2015.  Vlach & Johnson, 2013).  For example, young children beneﬁt from initial correct mappings whereas adults beneﬁt from erroneous associations in initial trials (Fitneva & Christiansen,The cross-situational learning paradigm has rarely been investigated in schoolage FL learners probably due to the assumption that in FL classrooms, the referent of a word is explicitly and directly pointed out by teachers.  This assumption does not hold because many FL classrooms in today’s world involve activities that do not strictly control language.  Can school-age FL learners discover a word’s referent by tracking FL-sounding words and ambiguous referents across situations.  Crosssituational FL word learning can be seen as consisting of two steps.  First, FL learners encode heard FL words in the presence of multiple potential referents.  The encoding process can be highly demanding even for a single novel word because a FL-sounding word can be obscure in all aspects of phonological features, including overall word and syllabic shapes, segmental details, and articulatory gestures.  Efﬁcient encoding may depend, to a substantial extent, on the learners’ sensitivity to the sound structure of the language (Hu & Schuele, 2005).  Second, FL learners have to carry the word forms, partially or completely encoded, from one situation to the next situation so that they can accumulate and compare information across situations and discover the correct referents of the heard words.  Thus, the encoded forms have to be durable and recognizable as the same forms when they are heard again across situations.  The two steps may occur simultaneously or sequentially and may interfere with each other.  For example, tracking information encoded in a previous learning event may be disrupted when one attempts to encode a newer word in the current situation.  Thus, the task of tracking multiple ambiguous mappings across situations, plus the difﬁculties in encoding FL forms on the ﬂy, may tax young FL learners’ memory resources to such an extent that they may not actively and effectively resolve ambiguity in word-referent mappings and may even ignore the FL forms that are referentially ambiguous.  Studies on cross-situational word learning have proposed several mechanisms to account for how L1 learners discover referents for words across multiple ambiguous situations.  While these mechanisms revealed the nature of cross-situational word learning in L1 learners, they generally do not consider the additional difﬁculties FL learners may face in encoding novel FL-sounding forms.  According to the associative learning account (Smith & Yu, 2008.  Vouloumanos, 2008.  Yu & Smith, 2007), when encountering multiple novel words with referential indeterminacy, learners track and maintain multiple hypotheses about the meanings of the words until sufﬁcient information from subsequent encounters conﬁrms or disconﬁrms the hypotheses.  According to the hypothesis testing account (Medina, Snedeker, Trueswell, & Gleitman, 2011.  Trueswell, Medina, Hafri, & Gleitman, 2013), learners attend to one form at a time and do not attempt a second hypothesis until the ﬁrst hypothesis is veriﬁed (Medina et al. , 2011).  The debate is similar to the debate about delayed and immediate decisions made in syntactic parsing (Carroll, 2008).  Whether by entertaining one or multiple associations at a time, mapping new words onto referents across time is a difﬁcult task due to the uncertainty in every learning trial.  In addition to the uncertainty in word-referent mappings, FL leaners face another challenge, namely, efﬁciently encoding FL forms into durable and recognizable representations that allow comparison across time.  Given the double difﬁculties, FL learners may experience total failure in cross-situational word learning.  In that case, cross-situational word learning is not a realistic mechanism in FL acquisition.  Thus, the ﬁrst goal of the study is to examine FL learners’ capacity of resolving referential ambiguity cross-situationally.  LEARNER VARIABLES.  Another goal of the study is to identify individual learner variables that may affect FL cross-situational word learning.  It follows from the above discussion that some aspects of individual differences, such as phonological awareness and memory span, may be associated with school-age FL learners’ capacity for cross-situational learning.  Phonological awareness refers to the awareness of the phonological composition of a spoken word.  It is a universal predictor of reading abilities across alphabetic orthographies (Ziegler et al. , 2010) and may also play a nontrivial role in learning to read a nonalphabetic orthography (Hu, 2013.  Newman, Tardif, Huang, & Shu, 2011).  In addition to reading, children with weakness in phonological awareness exhibit difﬁculties encoding phonological details for novel words in another language, whether in ostensive or nonostensive contexts (de Jong, Seveke, & van Veen, 2000.  Hu, 2012.  Hu & Schuele, 2005.  McBride-Chang, Cheung, Chow, Chow, & Choi, 2006.  Palladino & Ferrari, 2008).  With reduced sensitivity to the phonological structure of a language, they demonstrate reduced capacity to extract recurring phonological patterns from input to support word learning (Hu, 2014).  Sensitivity to the phonological composition of a word may also affect cross-situational learning.  Escudero, Mulak, and Vlach (2015) found that adult learners had greater difﬁculty learning vowel minimal pairs (e. g. , deet–det) than nonminimal pairs (e. g. , deet–bon) or consonant minimal pairs (e. g. , bon–ton).  Another relevant learner variable is memory span.  Memory capacity has been shown to be associated with FL learning difﬁculties (Palladino & Ferrari, 2008). 