INTRODUCTION.  The acquisition of heritage languages, i. e.  minority languages acquired in a migration context, has been a matter of debate in recent literature.  Heritage speakers (HSs) acquire two (or more) languages in childhood and thus the acquisition of a heritage language (HL) is an instance of bilingual acquisition.  HSs are either simultaneous bilinguals, if they are exposed to the minority and the majority language from birth, or successive bilinguals, if contact with the majority language occurs after extensive exposure to the family (heritage) language.  In either case, the age of onset of acquisition (AOA) of the HL is similar to monolinguals.  Nonetheless, a HL is defined by becoming a non-dominant language when the speakers start schooling and the amount of input and continued language use radically decreases for the HL (Rothman, ).  As a result, HSs’ linguistic performance became a fertile ground of inquiry, namely allowing researchers to discuss to what extent the steady state of linguistic knowledge ultimately attained by those speakers corresponds to what is attained by monolingual speakers (see the discussion in Montrul, .  Rothman, ).  When divergence between monolingual and HL acquisition is identified, different explanations have been put forward, namely incomplete development or language attrition (Montrul, .  Polinsky, ), or explanations relating to the quality of the input (Pascual y Cabo & Rothman, .  Pires & Rothman, ).  Other studies highlight the nature of the linguistic property under evaluation, with later-acquired structures showing a more deficient acquisition than early-acquired properties (Flores & Barbosa, .  Santos & Flores, ).  Later-acquired properties are expected to be acquired at an age (school age) in which the child gets reduced input from his/her HL, since the majority language is now the child’s dominant language.  It is true, in general, that children vary in the amount of exposure that they have to their ambient language(s).  This has been shown to be the case not only for children who grow up with two ambient languages, but also for L input in typical monolingual acquisition settings across families and across different language communities (Hart & Risley, .  Hoff, .  Hurtado, Marchman & Fernald, ).  Even innatism, which relativizes the role of input in grammatical development (e. g.  Wexler, ), presupposes a minimal amount of exposure to primary linguistic data in order to activate the language acquisition device.  There has to be a minimal threshold of exposure responsible for triggering acquisition.  Limited exposure below this supposed baseline may trigger comprehension and perception skills, but not productive ones, as seems to be the case with ‘overhearers’ (Au, Knightly, Jun & Oh, ).  It has indeed been shown that restricted input to one language in bilingual acquisition settings influences the development of lexical knowledge (Bialystok & Luk, .  Hoff & Naigles, .  Thordardottir, ), pronunciation (Kupisch, Barton, Klaschik, Lein, Stangen & van de Weijer, ) and morphosyntactic knowledge (Gathercole & Thomas, .  Rodina & Westergaard, .  Unsworth, Argyri, Cornips, Hulk, Sorace & Tsimpli, ).  However, more studies are needed in order to determine to what extent the quantity of input may limit the acquisition of different areas of grammar.  Many studies showing input effects in bilingual acquisition focus on early successive bilinguals, and measure the effects of length of exposure to the target language, which interacts with the age of onset (see discussion in Unsworth, ).  In this paper, and by studying the acquisition of a HL, we intend to evaluate the effects of the amount of input, in an acquisition setting in which the age of onset is similar to that of monolinguals.  In this case, we will evaluate the quantity of input through indirect measures focused on children’s families, namely considering households with first- or second-generation parents and the existence of older siblings.  Particularly, we evaluate the effect of the amount of input in the acquisition of mood selection in complement clauses, a matter of semantics that interacts with the lexicon (lexical semantics of the matrix verb) and syntax (of complement clauses).  The study is based on European Portuguese (EP) acquired as a HL by children and adolescent speakers whose dominant language is German.  Most HL studies test adult HSs and therefore cannot distinguish effects of acquisition from effects of subsequent language attrition.  In this study, we test individuals who are still acquiring the property at stake.  Since use of the subjunctive mood has been shown to stabilize late, we take into account a large age span (six–sixteen years of age at the moment of testing) and adopt a cross-sectional approach, which will allow us to infer a scale of acquisition.  HSs’ results will be compared to previous results from a study on monolingual acquisition of the EP subjunctive (Jesus, ), in terms of both the scale and the rate of acquisition (we will therefore look at age).  When discussing age, we will confirm the relevancy of certain age thresholds identified in preceding work on language acquisition and language attrition.  Additionally, we tested eight adult HSs, who represent the ultimate attainment of HL acquisition.  INPUT EFFECTS AND THE ACQUISITION OF A HERITAGE LANGUAGE.  The effects of limited exposure to primary linguistic data have attracted recent attention in the study of bilingual acquisition (see, e. g.  Grüter & Paradis, ).  It has been suggested that restricted input to one language in bilingual acquisition settings may influence the development of different linguistic domains, e. g.  vocabulary size (Hoff, Core, Place, Rumiche, Senor & Parra, ) or morphosyntactic development (Austin, .  Blom, .  Gathercole, .  Gathercole & Thomas, .  Hoff et al. , .  Rodina & Westergaard, .  Schlyter, .  Suchtelen, .  Thomas, Williams, Jones, Davies & Binks, .  Unsworth, .  Unsworth et al. , .  among many others).  Schlyter () and Blom (), for instance, claim that bilingual children with very unbalanced language input develop a ‘weaker language’, displaying a slower rate of acquisition and structural transfer from the stronger language.  The stronger (ambient) language, on the other hand, seems to develop indistinguishably from that of monolingual children of the same language background.  As Meisel () points out, the hypothesis of a weaker language suggests that exposure since birth is a necessary but not sufficient condition for native-like language acquisition.  This seems to suggest that sufficient exposure to the primary linguistic data must happen at the appropriate age in order to be successful.  Several studies argue in favour of this idea.  Gathercole (), Gathercole and Thomas (), and Thomas et al.  (), for instance, show that the grammatical development of the minority language (Welsh, in their case) depends on the amount of exposure to this language at home and in school.  Several other studies, which include parental input as an extralinguistic variable, reach similar conclusions (e. g.  Rodina & Westergard, .  Suchtelen, ).  Rodina and Westergard (), who analyze the acquisition of gender, show that Norwegian–Russian bilingual children from households where the two parents speak the minority language, Russian, outperform bilingual children from mixed households, who have less exposure to Russian.  Nevertheless, many studies which stress the role of the amount of input in the development of the minority language show that differences found at earlier ages are overcome at later ages in some domains (Gathercole, .  Gathercole, Thomas, Roberts, Hughes & Hughes, .  Paradis, Tremblay & Crago, .  Unsworth, ).  Consequently, they suggest that bilingual children may take longer to acquire certain structures of their weaker language, but they tend to reach native-like competence, even if at an older age, and follow the same acquisition path.  This observation shows that input differences mainly affect the rate of acquisition but not its outcome (see also Meisel, ).  This is strengthened by studies that include older children or adults (Gathercole et al. , ).  As an explanation for this protracted, yet native-like development, it has been suggested that children who have restricted input to one language may take more time to accumulate positive evidence (Gathercole, .  Gathercole & Thomas, ).  Consequently, they will need more time to accumulate this evidence if they have less exposure to the target language (see also the concept of ‘cumulative’ exposure, suggested by Unsworth, ).  However, not all linguistic domains seem to be similarly affected by reduced input.  Input effects have been shown with respect to the acquisition of grammatical structures that present opaque form–function mappings, such as the gender system and plural morphology in Welsh (Thomas & Gathercole, .  Thomas et al. , ) or the gender system in Dutch or Russian (Blom, Polišenskà & Unsworth, .  Cornips & Hulk, .  Polinsky, .  Rodina & Westergaard, .  Unsworth, ).  Also, structures that are syntactically very complex and/or are known to stabilize late in monolingual acquisition are good candidates for delayed acquisition in bilingual and, particularly, HL acquisition.  This is the case of clitic placement in EP (Flores & Barbosa, ), or structures which only occur in formal varieties of the target language, as described by Meisel, Elsig, and Bonnesen () for certain French interrogatives.  According to Tsimpli (), late acquisition is expected in general in the case of all non-core linguistic phenomena, which are related to languageexternal resources (such as working memory) or to interface phenomena.  In the case of these phenomena, Tsimpli’s prediction is that acquisition by bilingual subjects is determined only by input and not by age of onset.  What is essential for us is that timing in L development of the analyzed properties may be a further variable that has to be taken into account in studies on input effects in bilingualism.  It seems that structures which are acquired late in monolingual acquisition, due either to their complexity, interface nature, or absence in colloquial varieties, may show an even more protracted development in bilinguals’ weaker language.  Consequently, the division per se into early, late, and very late phenomena is very useful for us, if we relate the nature of the grammatical property with the amount of input together with maturational constraints, therefore not considering the factors in isolation (see Long & Rothman’s, , comments).  As for the interaction between the quantity of input and the type of property under analysis, if we assume that there are sensitive periods for the acquisition of different language domains (Meisel, ), we can suggest that insufficient exposure during the optimal phase of acquisition could indeed lead to an acquisition delay (or even failure).  In the case of late (or very late) properties, and in cases of reduced exposure at a later age, which happens with the HL child, the input the child receives during the relevant period may not be sufficient and, consequently, this delays its stabilization.  It has been suggested that in these cases bilingual children may not catch up and do not reach native-like knowledge in these domains (Thomas et al. , ).  The present study aims precisely at analyzing the effects of reduced input in the bilingual acquisition of a property, the distribution of the subjunctive mood in European Portuguese complement clauses, which stabilizes after the preschool years in monolingual acquisition.  In the next section, we summarize relevant facts concerning mood contrasts in EP complement clauses and its acquisition.  Since our subjects are HSs of EP living in Germany, we also summarize relevant facts concerning the distribution of mood in German.  MOOD IN EP AND GERMAN.  Distribution of indicative and subjunctive moods in EP Portuguese verbal morphology shows different moods, the main ones being the indicative and the subjunctive.  The selection of one or another mood in complement clauses is basically constrained by the meaning of the matrix predicate, though with some verb classes factors such as negation or the tense of the main clause may interfere with the selection of mood for complement clauses (see, e. g.  Marques, ).  In EP, the indicative is selected for complement clauses introduced by the following verb classes.  () a.  Strong epistemic verbs (which express knowledge or a high degree of belief), such as saber ‘know’ or pensar ‘think’ b.  Declarative verbs, such as dizer ‘say’ c.  Commissive verbs, such as prometer ‘promise’ d.  Fiction verbs, such as sonhar ‘dream’ On the other hand, the subjunctive is selected by verbs like the ones listed() a.  Non-epistemic implicative verbs (including verbs such as deixar ‘let’ or conseguir ‘manage’, and evaluative predicates, such as lamentar ‘regret’ or achar bem ‘approve’) b.  Non-epistemic non-implicative verbs (including verbs of volition, such as querer ‘want’ and directive verbs, such as mandar ‘order’) c.  Weak epistemic verbs (which express a negative belief or a low degree of belief, such as duvidar ‘doubt’) Concerning (), it should be said that in Karttunen () implicative verbs are those that allow the inference that the embedded proposition is true in affirmative sentences, but do not allow such inference in negative sentences.  here, the term is broadly used to refer to this kind of verbs plus factive verbs, i. e.  those whose complement proposition is taken to be true regardless of the truth value of the main proposition.  Apart from the verbs mentioned in (), there is a group of verbs that in EP accepts both moods in the complement clause.  This is the case of acreditar ‘to believe’ and a group of other verbs with the same core meaning.  Different analyses have been suggested concerning the distinctions of mood in the adult’s grammar.  Here, we accept the account of Marques (), which is based on EP data.  This author proposes that two main semantic factors intervene in the mood system of EP.  epistemicity (the attitude expressed towards the proposition is one of knowledge or belief) and veridicality (as defined in Giannakidou, ).  According to Giannakidou’s concept of veridicality, a propositional operator is veridical if the proposition it introduces is taken to be true by some entity in the relevant model, which corresponds to a set of possible worlds.  For instance, factive verbs, such as to know or to regret, are veridical operators, since their complement clauses are taken to be true by the speaker and the (entity referred to by the) subject of the main clause.  Similarly, verbs like to think and to dream are also veridical operators, since their complement clauses are taken to be true in the worlds that correspond respectively to the beliefs and to the dreams of the main clause’s subject.  The fact that a context is veridical does not mean that an epistemic propositional attitude is being openly expressed.  For instance, some factive verbs, like regret, are veridical, but they are not epistemic.  They do not primarily express an attitude of belief, but rather another kind of attitude, that we might call ‘evaluative’ (see Palmer, , amongst others).  Marques () argues that in EP all the verbs that select an indicative complement express an attitude of knowledge or POSITIVE belief (i. e.  they are veridical operators associated with epistemic modality).  This is clearly the case of the verbs in (a), and also the case of declarative (b) and commissive (c) verbs.  these verbs also express an attitude of belief, committing the subject of the main clause to the truth of the embedded proposition.  With fiction verbs (d), Marques claims that they are also epistemic predicates, with the particularity of the belief being relativized to the relevant model, e. g. 