I N T R O D U C T I O N.  A large volume of research has been conducted over the last century to understand fully the development of interrogative forms and functions in English-speaking children (see Chouinard, , for a review).  However, Mandarin Chinese, the most widely spoken language in the world (Graddol, ), has not been equally empirically explored.  Recently, there have been Chinese studies examining the development of interrogative forms in L children (Fahn, .  Zhou, ), and forms (Ding, .  Gao, .  Yuan, ) and functions (Wang, .  Yuan, .  Zhu & Wu, ) in L learners.  However, very few were conducted with representative samples to establish the developmental norms or patterns of interrogative form and function in Mandarin Chinese.  We have already conducted a corpus-based study on early question acquisition in Cantonese-speaking young children in Hong Kong (Li, Tse, Wong, Wong & Leung, ).  Mandarin Chinese, however, differs greatly from Cantonese in terms of lexicon, syntax, and pronunciation (Tse & Li, ) and therefore deserves a similar study.  In addition, the Mandarin-speaking children in the present study have a monolingual language environment in Beijing, whereas their counterparts in Hong Kong thrive in a ‘trilingual and biliterate’ society (Li & Rao, ).  Comparing their acquisition of interrogative forms and functions can provide some cross-linguistic evidence for the effects of language environments.  This study is thus aimed at filling the gap in the literature.  Another objective of this study is to examine further the cross-linguistic universality of the Information Requesting Mechanism (IRM) proposed by Chouinard ().  Having reviewed all the studies on the early acquisition of English questions, Chouinard hypothesized that request for information (RfI) might be the universal and dominant function of children’s question.  This hypothesis, however, was challenged by our previous study on early child Cantonese in  children aged , , and  months (Li et al. , ), which found that request for action (RfA) rather than RfI might be the dominant interrogative function.  This inconsistent finding was regarded as the result of the cultural difference between Cantonese- and English-speaking young children (Li et al. , ).  But it might also be caused by the age differences in samples or the linguistic differences between English and Cantonese.  To verify this cultural influence, we need to conduct a similar study on Mandarin Chinese using samples that share the same Chinese culture and communication task but speak different languages.  Therefore, in this study, we thoroughly examine the interrogatives elicited from a similar early child Mandarin corpus and empirically explore the factors influencing the early acquisition of interrogatives in order to determine whether the IRM is applicable to Mandarin Chinese.  Development of interrogative forms in Mandarin Chinese.  Mandarin Chinese has a very complex interrogative system, which is composed of a large number of members.  question words (i. e.  ‘what’, ‘who’), question forms (i. e.  the ‘A-not-A’ construction), question mood particle (i. e.  ma), and intonation (Gao, ).  The various combinations of these members could make a question ambiguous and even controversial for Chinese speakers, and even linguists, in terms of the scope of questioning, the degree of question mood, and the degree of grammaticalization of various question forms.  This could easily lead to misunderstanding and miscommunication (Gao, ) and make the acquisition of interrogative forms a really challenging task (Gao, ) for young Mandarin-speaking children.  The Chinese interrogative form is challenging not only for young children but also for linguists, who have not achieved any consensus on a typology (Gao, .  Matthews & Yip, .  Ross & Ma, .  Tse & Li, ).  Liing () identified four major interrogative forms.  particle questions, ‘háishì’ questions, ‘A-not-A’ questions, and wh-questions.  Also, Chinese linguists have explored A-not-A questions in different syntactic contexts (Cheng, ), and their modularity and forms (Huang, .  Hsieh, ).  In this study, we adopted the most comprehensive and systematic typology, which was proposed by Matthews and Yip (), as it has been verified by our previous corpus-based studies on early child Cantonese (Tse & Li, .  Li et al. , ).  As Cantonese has many more interrogative forms than Mandarin Chinese (Li et al. , .  Li, Wong, Tse, Leung, & Ye, ), we used the eight forms commonly shared by Cantonese and Mandarin interrogatives to allow a cross-linguistic comparison between Cantonese and Mandarin interrogatives (for details, please see ‘Coding of the interrogatives’ below).  Currently, the most common topic for early interrogative studies concerns wh-questions in Mandarin Chinese.  Fahn () studied the acquisition of monoclausal wh-questions and found that subject wh-questions were much easier to learn than object wh-questions for Chinese children aged between four and six years.  Zhou () found that young children exhibited an adultlike sensitivity to the licensing environments for the non-interrogative use of wh-words.  Su, Jin, Wan, Zhang, and Su () found that young children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) could understand the question readings rather than the statement readings of wh-words.  Also, there have been other wh-question studies on L–L transfer and comparison among Japanese speakers (Yuan, ) and English speakers (Yuan, ), and on different strategies for the acquisition of different interrogative forms (Gao, ).  Another common topic is the sequence of question acquisition in Chinese children.  Ding () found that the sequence of yes/no question acquisition was ma question > tag question and ba question > rhetorical question, and this sequence was roughly similar for L and L Chinese learners.  Wong and Ingram () found that the sequence of Cantonese question acquisition between one and three years of age was particle/intonation questions > wh-questions > A-not-A questions.  They tended to believe that syntactic complexity, cognitive complexity, and personal/social factors, as well as their interactions, could have determined the sequence of question acquisition.  In addition, our previous Cantonese studies (Li et al. , .  Tse & Li, ) found that girls produced more types of interrogative forms than boys, and that there was a significant form–function preference, with wh- and multiple questions being primarily used to seek information.  Is the same pattern found in the interrogative development of Mandarin-speaking young children.  This study addresses this question by examining the development of interrogative forms with a large-scale sample of Mandarin-speaking young children.  Development of interrogative functions in Mandarin Chinese.  Interrogative function refers to the pragmatic function of questioning (Li et al. , ), and it has been widely and repeatedly studied in the past two centuries since Sully () identified two major functions of interrogatives.  asking for information (‘what’, ‘how old’, ‘where’, ‘who’) and asking for reasons and causes.  Piaget () created a complete typology of interrogative functions.  causality, reality and history, action and intention, classification and evaluation, and calculation.  Later on, Smith (), Holzman (), and Sachs and Devin () further categorized child questions into eight categories.  external world, internal state, request, imperative, attention getting, instruction, confirmation, and repetition.  Since the s, a corpus approach has been employed to investigate the development of interrogative functions (Freed, .  Sinclair & Gessel, ).  It is important to note that half of those functions identified in previous studies (Freed, .  Holzman, .  Piaget, .  Sinclair & Gessel, .  Sully, ) are asking for information (RfI), indicating that interrogatives often serve the function of information seeking.  Recently, Chouinard () conducted a systematic literature review and four separate studies on early interrogative development in young American children.  Together, the results of her four studies supported the existence of the IRM as a way for children to learn about the world.  As RfI was the most dominant function (%) of American children’s questions in her studies, she hypothesized that RfI might be “a universal function of children’s interrogatives”.  Tse and Li () used Chouinard’s framework to test data drawn from their Early Child Cantonese Corpus, and developed a typology of Cantonese interrogative functions.  (i) request for information (RfI) about names, locations, descriptions, and so forth.  (ii) request for action (RfA), such as to draw attention to themselves, to declare something, to ask permission to do something, to generate conversation, to seek confirmation or verification, to suggest certain actions, and to prohibit some actions that they dislike.  (iii) emotional expression to convey their annoyance (anger) or disappointment (dissatisfaction).  and (iv) egocentric speech, which is directed to no one but themselves.  Using this typology, our previous study (Li et al. , ) challenged the generality and applicability of Chouinard’s IRM hypothesis and found that request for action (RfA) (rather than RfI) was the dominant function of early childhood Cantonese.  This contrary finding, however, needs to be verified further with empirical evidence from an early Mandarin corpus that shares the same culture and communication task as in the Cantonese study but involves different languages.  If Cantonese- and Mandarin-speaking young children share the same pattern, which is different from that of English, we could attribute this inconsistent finding to cultural influences.  If not, the factor of language (instead of culture) should be highlighted.  Furthermore, previous studies have found cross-linguistic evidence to support the form–function preference in early childhood interrogatives.  James and Seebach () found that yes/no questions were primarily used as directives, whereas wh-questions were employed to initiate and maintain conversations.  A similar pattern was found by Shatz () and Celce-Murcia and Larsen-Freeman () with English-speaking children.  A previous study on early Cantonese questions (Li et al. , ) also found similar patterns.  wh-questions were primarily used to request information, and intonation/echo and the rhetorical questions were used to request action.  The present study further explores whether this preference is cross-linguistic, based on the evidence from a corpus-based study of Mandarin-speaking young children.  Predictors of early language development.  Many family, preschool, and environmental factors are known to have an influence on early language acquisition.  Family socioeconomic status (SES) has been identified as one of these factors (Hart & Risley, , .  McLoyd, ).  Home language input such as parental support has been found to be another predictor of young children’s acquisition of wh-questions (Gullo, a, b).  Other factors such as a supportive home environment with rich reading resources, parent–child shared reading, and maternal book-reading strategies can also make a great contribution to early language development (DeJong & Leseman, .  Haden, Reese & Fivush, .  Roberts, Jurgens & Burchinal, ).  For example, Rowland, Pine, Lieven, and Theakston () found that the acquisition order of wh-questions could be predicted by the frequency with which the mother used particular wh-words and verbs in conversations with the child.  Another important predictor of early language acquisition is TV viewing time.  Recent studies have repeatedly documented a negative association between early TV exposure and language development (Barr, Lauricella, Zack & Calvert, .  Hudon, Fennell & Hoftyzer, .  Pempek, Kirkorian & Anderson, .  Tomopoulos, Dreyer, Berkule, Fierman, Brockmeyer & Mendelsohn, ).  Nathanson and Rasmussen () found that mother–child communication was less frequent and less verbally responsive when dyads viewed TV.  Duch et al.  () found that children who watched more than  hours of television a day had lower communication scores.  A very recent neuroimaging study (Takeuchi et al. , ) also confirmed the negative effect of TV viewing on a child’s verbal intelligence quotient (VIQ).  However, Takeuchi et al. ’s study also found some positive effects of TV viewing on the regional gray/white matter volume of the frontopolar and medial prefrontal areas, visual cortex, hypothalamus/septum, and sensorimotor areas in young children.  All these brain areas are associated with cognitive and intellectual abilities.  Does TV viewing have any negative or positive effects on early interrogative development.  Another aim of the present study is to determine whether TV viewing has any negative or positive effects on early interrogative development in Mandarin-speaking young children.  The following research questions were set up to guide this study.  .  What are the interrogative forms produced by a representative sample of Mandarin-speaking young children.  Are there any age and gender differences in the development of interrogative forms.  .  What interrogative functions are present in early childhood Mandarin.  Are there any age and gender differences in the development of interrogative functions.  .  What are the predictors of early interrogative development in Mandarin Chinese.  <Middle>Participants.  The Early Childhood Mandarin Corpus used in this study consisted of the utterances produced by  Mandarin-speaking preschoolers randomly sampled from eight preschools located in the four major districts of Beijing.  Chaoyang, Dongcheng, Xicheng, and Haidian.  This sample represented children from four age groups (ages . , . , . , and . ), with twenty-one boys and twenty-one girls in each age group.  As shown in Table , the average age of each group was very close to their target age, except for group  whose average age was . .  This is because the sampling was carried out very early in the first semester, so most of the kindergarteners had not achieved the target age.  All the participants were native speakers of Mandarin, and their parents and teachers also spoke Mandarin at home and at preschool, respectively.  Most of the parents were degree holders, and some children had taken extracurricular activities and private tutoring in the early years (see Table ).  The average TV viewing time ranged between · to · hours per day, and the parent–child conversation time ranged between · to · hours per day.  Communication task.  Participants of the same age were paired randomly (boy/girl, boy/boy, or girl/girl) and were left in the play corner to play for  minutes.  A set of regular toys, including cooking materials, faux food and fruit, furniture and electrical appliances, hospital materials, and vehicles, was set up in the corner (Li et al. , ). 