I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Distinguishing between declaratives and interrogatives is an important ability for language users.  In English and many other languages, interrogatives generally involve syntactic structures and word order patterns that are different from declaratives.  For example, in English the canonical ordering in simple transitive declarative sentences is subject– verb–object (Slobin & Bever, ), as in Anna likes chocolate.  However, this ordering is disrupted in the associated polar interrogative, which inverts the subject and auxiliary verb, and inserts an utterance-initial do, since no auxiliary is present.  Thus, Anna likes chocolate becomes Does Anna like chocolate.  Moreover, in so-called wh-questions, a grammatical phrase that normally occurs in the declarative form is absent, and its content is queried by a wh-word – e. g.  who, what, where, how, etc.  – that occurs at the beginning of the sentence (Whatt does Anna like ti. ).  (The t stands for ‘trace’, and represents the structural location of the constituent that is related to the wh-word that shares its index – in this case, the direct object of like. ) Similar kinds of word order variations occur in many other (primarily Indo-European) languages (e. g.  Dryer, .  König & Siemund, ).  In many prominent theories of syntax acquisition, children learn basic word order (i. e.  the relative placement of subject nouns, object nouns, and verbs) and morphosyntax by bootstrapping off of declarative sentences (typically transitive declaratives) and typical linkages between syntactic positions in simple declarative sentences and elements of the scenes they describe (Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz & Gleitman, .  Pinker, ).  Thus, given the differences in word order and morphosyntactic patterning of declaratives and interrogatives, distinguishing the two sentence types is crucial for correctly learning the syntax of both types of utterances.  Learning mechanisms that analyzed declaratives and interrogatives as the same type would result in cascading errors in syntax acquisition, since fundamental misanalysis early on would result in incorrect representations in learning as subsequent utterances are processed (Pinker, ).  Since interrogatives constitute close to half of the utterances in young children’s input, in roughly equal proportions of polar interrogatives and wh-questions (% and %, respectively.  Newport, ), understanding when and how learners start to differentiate interrogatives and declaratives is important for understanding grammatical acquisition more broadly.  One way of distinguishing declaratives and interrogatives would simply be to use the word order properties just described as a basis for segregating sentence types.  Indeed, -month-olds appear to be able to use word order information in just this way (Geffen & Mintz, ).  However, there is reason to doubt that infants could use distributional information of this type as the INITIAL source of information for discriminating sentences.  To see why, consider the kind of information infants would have to rely on if they did not already know the distributional properties of declarative syntax.  The distributional information involves a small set of highly frequent closed-class words (auxiliary verbs and wh-words) occurring in sentence-initial position.  While infants could classify sentences as interrogatives based on this property, it is hard to see how infants could discover this property a priori.  For one thing, if such a segregation is based on words rather than categories – i. e.  who, what, which, does, etc. , rather than wh-word, AUX – then it is not clear how to avoid segregating other sentences that are syntactically similar but differ in their initial words.  For example, such a procedure would create distinctions between utterances that start with determiners and those that start with pronouns, despite their shared underlying structure (e. g.  sentences like The boy saw the girl vs.  You saw the girl).  This problem might be avoided with knowledge of the syntactic categories (e. g.  wh-operator, AUX, NP), but it is not clear that infants have the requisite category knowledge at a point in acquisition where making sentence-type discrimination would be important.  Furthermore, even if infants did have that category knowledge, it is not clear how they would know to use those category distinctions – i. e.  wh-word and AUX vs.  everything else – and not other distinctions as a basis for segregating declaratives and interrogatives.  Indeed, being able to distinguish declaratives from interrogatives might be a prerequisite for successfully learning at least some of those categories in the first place, as well as their correlation with sentence type.  Thus, another source of information is likely to be necessary to make initial sentence-type distinctions.  There is reason to believe that sentence-level prosody provides just such an information source.  Prosody as a cue to sentence type Prosody consists of pitch, duration, and intensity.  Here we outline the potential role of these components in cueing sentence type.  Pitch.  In many languages, the final pitch contour is an important perceptual cue for sentence-type discrimination (American English.  Săfárŏvá & Swerts, .  Castilian Spanish.  Face, .  French.  Vion & Colas, ).  In adult-directed speech, polar interrogatives typically end with a final rise in pitch, while declaratives end with final flat or falling intonation (Bartels, .  Hedberg, Sosa & Fadden, .  Ladd, ), although there are some exceptions (e. g.  Belfast English.  Jarman & Cruttenden, .  Chickasaw.  Gordon, ).  The same is true of declarative questions, which differ from declarative statements only in prosody (e. g.  Anna likes chocolate. ).  If speech to infants is similarly organized, prosody could provide a robust tool for initially distinguishing sentence types.  Perceptual studies have demonstrated that, while the exact cues adults use to distinguish between declaratives and interrogatives may vary by language, most languages rely on some form of pitch cue (e. g.  Gussenhoven & Chen, ).  For example, although Russian has wh-words, sentences often do not include lexical or syntactic/grammatical indicators of sentence type (Makarova, ).  Russian has relatively free word order and no auxiliary verbs (Rojina, ), so listeners rely on pitch peak alignment rather than lexical cues to perceive distinctions between declaratives and polar interrogatives (Makarova, .  Svetozarova, ).  Declaratives and exclamations have earlier accent pitch peaks (here defined as THE F MAXIMUM ALONG THE SEGMENTAL STRING OF A THREE-SYLLABLE WORD.  Makarova, ) than interrogatives (this is also seen in Dutch.  van Heuven & Haan, ).  There is also an effect of pitch peak height, where interrogatives have higher pitch peaks than declaratives (Makarova, ).  In languages like English and French, which do use lexical markings (e. g.  auxiliary verbs) to distinguish sentence types, adults primarily rely on fundamental frequency for perceiving distinctions between sentence types (English.  Cruttenden, .  Lieberman, .  French.  Vion & Colas, ).  In many languages, the final pitch contour is a critical (if not the most important) region for discriminating between interrogatives and declaratives.  A gating study with French noun phrases found that listeners’ accuracy in making a sentence-type judgment improved nearly % (% to %) when final pitch information was introduced at the end of an utterance.  In the absence of this final prosodic information, subjects defaulted to a declarative judgment (Vion & Colas, ).  Various dialects of English also rely on final pitch contours as an important perceptual cue for sentence-type discrimination (British English [e. g.  London, Cambridge].  Grabe, .  although see Jarman & Cruttenden, ).  For example, Săfárŏvá and Swerts () found that American English speakers were more likely to identify utterances as declarative questions if the utterances ended with a final rise.  Duration.  Duration is a secondary prosodic correlate of sentence type in other Germanic languages (e. g.  Dutch, Orkney English.  van Heuven & van Zanten, ) in which pitch is the primary prosodic cue.  For instance, in Dutch, interrogatives typically have a faster speech rate than declaratives, although this difference is more apparent in declarative questions than polar interrogatives.  In addition, perceptual studies have demonstrated that -month-olds can use syllable duration differences to detect syntactic boundaries, but only in conjunction with other converging cues such as pitch changes (e. g.  Hirsh-Pasek, Kemler Nelson, Jusczyk, Cassidy, Druss & Kennedy, .  Jusczyk, Hirsh-Pasek, Kemler Nelson, Kennedy, Woodward & Piwoz, ).  Thus, to the degree that duration covaries with pitch in relation to sentence type, infants could potentially use duration in combination with pitch to discriminate declaratives and interrogatives.  Intensity.  Intensity correlates with the other dimensions of prosody, especially pitch, and infants appear to be sensitive to this correlation (Fernald, ).  For example, in English, stressed syllables are marked by higher pitch and intensity compared to non-stressed syllables (Hay & Saffran, ).  Thus, as with duration, to the extent that intensity correlates with other prosodic cues that differentiate declaratives from interrogatives, intensity could contribute to sentence-type discrimination.  Summary of prosodic cues with respect to sentence type.  To summarize the research we have just discussed, in English and many other languages, declaratives and interrogatives give rise to different prosodic patterns, particularly in the final pitch contour.  Moreover, adult listeners rely on prosodic information to make sentence-type distinctions in perception.  However, with respect to English, the distinguishing prosodic difference between declaratives and interrogatives seems to hold only with respect to polar interrogatives (i. e.  yes/no questions), and not wh-questions.  Wh-questions usually have a falling or level pitch, and thus have final contours similar to declaratives (Hedberg et al. , .  Ladd, .  Ladefoged & Johnson, ), at least in adult-directed speech.  One important question we address in this paper is whether similar prosodic patterns across sentence types are evident in infant-directed speech, and how infants might use prosody to discriminate sentence types.  Establishing the prosodic characteristics of wh-questions, polar interrogatives, and declaratives is critical for understanding how prosody could be used by infants to classify utterances in syntactically meaningful ways.  However, before discussing our analyses, we briefly discuss prior research on infants’ sensitivity to prosody.  Infants’ sensitivity to prosody.  There is some evidence that young infants might start out using prosody as a perceptual cue to sentence-type distinctions.  Frota, Butler, and Vigário () tested infants learning European Portuguese, a language which distinguishes between sentence types using ONLY prosodic information, and found that infants as young as five to six months can distinguish between declaratives and polar interrogatives.  Soderstrom, Ko, and Nevzorova () tested English-learning infants between . · and .  years of age and found that they could distinguish declarative statements from declarative questions, which only differ in their prosodic contours, suggesting some ability on the part of infants to discriminate sentence types based on prosody.  However, the wide age range of the subjects (between . · and . ) makes it diﬃcult to determine when this ability begins.  Moreover, speakers may modify prosody more sharply to mark declarative questions as questions, compared to more typical interrogative types (e. g.  polar interrogatives).  While it remains unclear when English-learning infants begin to use prosodic information to distinguish between sentence types, there is a wealth of evidence demonstrating infants’ general sensitivity to prosodic information from an early age.  Infants can use prosody to make distinctions between broad rhythmic classes of languages (Mehler, Jusczyk, Lambertz, Halsted, Bertoncini & Amiel-Tison, .  Moon, Cooper & Fifer, .  Nazzi, Bertoncini & Mehler, .  see Nespor, Shukla & Mehler, , for an overview of rhythmic classification).  In addition, infants can use their sensitivity to prosodic cues to identify syntactic unit boundaries including clauses (e. g.  Hirsh-Pasek et al. , .  Kemler Nelson, Hirsh-Pasek, Jusczyk, and Cassidy, ) and phrases (Gerken, Jusczyk & Mandel, .  Jusczyk et al. , ).  Thus, there is ample evidence that infants are sensitive to prosody, suggesting that they could, in principle, use prosodic information to make initial sentence-type distinctions.  OUTLINE OF THE STUDY The goal of the present study was to evaluate the prosodic properties of declaratives and interrogatives in infant-directed speech in American English, with the aim of understanding whether prosodic information would be useful, in principle, for the initial discrimination of sentence types by infants.  There has not, to our knowledge, been any thorough analysis of infant-directed speech that establishes the availability of prosodic cues to sentence type.  As we indicated earlier, such information could play an important role in early syntactic acquisition.  Recall that, in adult-directed speech, polar interrogatives and whquestions have different prosodic properties (Hedberg et al. , ), with wh-questions patterning similarly to declaratives (Ladd, ).  Therefore, a particular question we address is whether the two question types have similar prosodic properties in infant-directed speech, as well as how they differ from declaratives.  To address this question, we examined typical prosodic contours in the speech of three mothers to their preverbal infants.  We evaluated the prosodic characteristics of declaratives, polar interrogatives, and wh-questions to determine whether there is a common set of prosodic features that distinguish declaratives and either type of interrogative.  Based on the findings with adult-directed speech, we hypothesized that prosodic information would distinguish between declaratives and polar interrogatives, but that prosody would not be a viable source of information for distinguishing between declaratives and wh-questions.  In Analysis , we describe the prosodic measures we examined across sentence types, and present results organized as contrasting pairs of sentence types (declaratives vs.  polar interrogatives, declaratives vs.  whquestions, and polar interrogatives vs.  wh-questions).  Broadly, we measured the distribution of pitch (F), duration, and intensity over the final two syllables of declaratives, wh-questions, and polar interrogatives, in speech addressed to infants, and we present two sets of analyses based on these measurements.  To preview our results, we do indeed find that prosodic measures differ between declaratives and polar interrogatives, but not wh-questions.  In Analysis , we present a linear classification model that, when trained on the prosodic characteristics of a subset of declaratives and polar interrogatives, can classify untrained utterances at above-chance levels.  Finally, we examine the implications of our results for infants’ sentence-type discrimination ability.  <Middle> ANALYSIS .  PROSODIC DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DECLARATIVES AND INTERROGATIVES.  METHODS.  Input corpora.  We evaluated input to three English-learning children from the Brent corpus (Brent & Siskind, , files s, s, and v) from the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, ) for the analysis procedure.  We selected the Brent corpus because it contains speech to preverbal infants, and provides the largest number of audio-recordings of Standard American Englishspeaking mother–child dyads of any corpora in the database.  We only analyzed utterances of the mother directed towards her preverbal infant, taken from two to three consecutive sessions spanning a – week period depending on the subject.  Infants ages ranged from . · to . ·.  Recordings were made in the subjects’ homes.  Mothers were fitted with a small waist pack and a lapel microphone located just below their mouths, and instructed to go about their daily routines while home alone with the child (Brent & Siskind, ).  Selection of utterances.  We analyzed approximately thirty utterances per sentence type (declarative, wh-question, and polar interrogative) for each speaker, for a total of roughly ninety utterances per speaker.  Sentences had to meet several criteria for inclusion.  We based our initial selection criteria on structural properties.  Polar interrogatives were characterized by subject and auxiliary inversion, possibly in combination with do-support.  Wh-questions were characterized by the typical auxiliary inversion structure of polar interrogatives with a wh-word such as who, what, where, or how in the utterance-initial position.  Declaratives followed the canonical transitive word order.  There were several exceptions to these criteria.  We allowed three declarative sentence fragments – grammatical phrases that were not complete sentences, e. g.  some more carrot).  We referred to the context and punctuation coded in the transcript to determine that these were indeed declaratives.  We also included one polar interrogative fragment.  Are you.  Our analysis primarily focused on the initial instance of a given utterance.  (Approximately % of utterances ( out of ) occurred two or more times in a single session, with the majority of repetitions being questions ( repeated utterances were wh-questions,  were polar interrogatives).  Of those thirty-five utterances, we analyzed repetitions of nineteen utterances.  The remaining sixteen utterances contained repetitions with background vocalizations that made them difficult or impossible to analyze.  Results did not change with the addition of the duplicate utterances. ) We narrowed our selection further by listening to the accompanying waveform.  Utterances were eliminated if they included vocalization or background noise, making analysis difficult or impossible.  For example, laughing, crying, blowing raspberries.  We eliminated unintelligible sentences because we used the mother’s pronunciation to help define syllable boundaries.  We analyzed a total of  sentences (See Table ).  Location of analyses within sentences Separate analyses of each acoustic measure are detailed below.  We analyzed the penultimate and final syllables (following the precedent of Fisher & Tokura, ) given that, in many languages, the final pitch contour is a critical (if not the most important) region in the utterance where prosodic differences between interrogatives and declaratives occur.  We reasoned that the final two syllables were likely to contain most of the variability in final pitch contour.  For each utterance, coders marked the boundaries for the penultimate and final syllables for analysis by hand.  Boundaries were marked by one or two coders, then verified by the first author.  Coders initially marked syllable boundaries by examining the spectrogram and listening to the corresponding waveform.  Coders also used regions of silence to mark the end boundary of the final syllable.  Disagreements were resolved by having all the coders listen to the sentences, followed by a group discussion, and if there was still a disagreement, the first author decided on the appropriate marking.  (Discrepancies occurred in approximately % of sentences, and were generally off by only a few milliseconds. ) Coders labeled each section with a rough English transcription of the syllable.  This was a necessary step for information extraction using the ProsodyPro Praat script (Xu, ), which carried out batch extraction of MeanF, MaxF, MinF, duration, and intensity from each labeled interval within all  files (using the default settings, F range.  – Hz.  F sample rate.   Hz.  Npoints per interval.  ).  Pitch variables.  To assess the availability of pitch as a cue to sentence type in infant-directed speech, we measured average pitch (MeanF) as well as lowest and highest pitch (MinF and MaxF, respectively).  For MeanF and MaxF, we were interested primarily in the change of these values across the final two syllables (see ‘Methods’ section).  MeanF provides a simple, coarse measure that can be used to identify the general degree of sentence-final pitch rise or fall.  MaxF, while clearly related to MeanF, provides specific information about pitch peak.  Recall that some languages, including Russian (Makarova, .  Svetozarova, ), and Hungarian (Gósy & Terken, ), rely on pitch peak alignment rather than lexical cues to mark distinctions between declaratives and polar interrogatives.  Declaratives and exclamations have earlier peaks than interrogatives.  There is also an effect of pitch peak height, where interrogatives have higher pitch peaks than declaratives.  Even languages like English, which do use lexical markings (e. g.  auxiliary verbs) to distinguish sentence types, demonstrate diﬀerences in pitch peak location between sentence types.  For example, English wh-questions show an earlier pitch rise and ﬁnal F decline (Best, Levitt & McRoberts, ).  Thus, the location and degree of MaxF could be a useful cue for distinguishing between sentence types.  We used MinF primarily as a way of calculating the derived measure of pitch excursion across the final two syllables that is based on the most extreme values (see ‘Methods’ section) rather than on averages.  Since infant-directed speech is characterized by exaggerated prosodic contours, including higher mean pitch and expanded pitch excursion (Fernald & Kuhl, ), it is an open question which properties of pitch contours that distinguish between sentence types in adult-directed speech are maintained in speech to infants.  For analyzing PITCH EXCURSION, we identified the lowest F and highest F when considering the penultimate and final syllables together.  We then subtracted whichever extreme value was in the penultimate syllable from the extreme value that was in the final syllable.  Thus, positive pitch excursions indicated rising pitch, and negative pitch excursions indicated falling pitch.  For example, if the lowest pitch was · Hz in the penultimate syllable and the highest F was · Hz in the final syllable, the pitch excursion would be a pitch rise of · Hz (·–·).  When both extreme values came from the same syllable, we subtracted the extreme that came first from the extreme that came last, resulting in the same correspondence of the sign of the excursion with excursion direction.  MinF and MaxF were not available for twenty-one sentences ( declaratives,  polar interrogative, and  wh-questions) (%) due to incomplete pitch information extracted by the Praat script (Xu, ), so they were excluded from the pitch excursion analysis.  Duration and intensity.  Duration and average intensity were extracted from the marked syllables in Praat using the ProsodyPro Praat script (Xu, ) (see section, ‘Location of analyses within sentences’, above). Summaries of all direct measurements are given in Table .  Summaries of the derived measures are given in Table .  Results are presented as contrasting pairs of sentence types.  declaratives versus polar interrogatives, declaratives versus wh-questions, and polar interrogatives versus wh-questions by measure.  With the exception of the pitch excursion analysis, which only focused on differences between sentence types, not syllable positions, data were subjected to a mixed  ×  ANOVA with Sentence Type as a ﬁxed eﬀect and Syllable Position (penultimate or ﬁnal) as a repeated measure.  (Adding Speaker as an additional variable did not change the pattern of results. ) We were primarily interested in an interaction of Syllable Position with SentenceMeanF.  Analyses revealed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of Sentence Type and a signiﬁcant Sentence Type by Syllable Position interaction for declaratives compared to polar interrogatives and for polar interrogatives compared to wh-questions.  In contrast, analyses revealed a main eﬀect of Syllable Position only for declaratives compared to wh-questions (see Tables – for details of the ANOVAs).  Polar interrogatives had signiﬁcantly higher mean pitch (M = ·, SD = ·) for the ﬁnal syllable compared to declaratives (M = ·, SD = ·.  t() = ·, p < ·) and wh-questions (M = ·, SD = ·.  t() = ·, p < ·).  However, consistent with the signiﬁcant interaction, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between sentence types in the penultimate syllable.  In contrast, there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in MeanF values for the penultimate or the ﬁnal syllable in wh-questions compared to declaratives (ps > ·).  There was a fall in mean pitch from the penultimate to the ﬁnal syllable in declaratives (M = –· Hz, SD = · Hz) and wh-questions (M = –· Hz, SD = · Hz), while polar interrogatives showed a rise in mean pitch (M = · Hz, SD = · Hz).  In adult-directed speech, one of the primary distinctions between declaratives and polar interrogatives is the final prosodic contour – i. e.  interrogatives have a final rise and declaratives have a final fall.  Wh-questions also typically end with final falling or flat intonation (Bartels, .  Hedberg et al. , ).  Larger differences in mean pitch between penultimate and final syllables could make it easier for infants to acoustically distinguish between sentence types.  These results are consistent with adult-directed speech and demonstrate that MeanF can be useful for distinguishing polar interrogatives from declaratives and wh-questions, but not declaratives from wh-questions. Analyses revealed a significant main effect of Sentence Type, a significant main effect of Syllable Position, and a significant Sentence Type by Syllable Position interaction for polar interrogatives compared to declaratives and wh-questions.  However, there were no main effects or interactions for declaratives compared to wh-questions (see Tables – for details of the ANOVAs).  Declaratives showed a decline in MaxF from the penultimate syllable (M= ·, SD = ·) to the final syllable (M = ·, SD = ·), consistent with the prosodic contour of declaratives in adult-directed speech.  Polar interrogatives demonstrated a rise from the penultimate syllable (M= ·, SD = ·) to the final syllable (M= ·, SD = ·), consistent with the final rise pitch contour in adult-directed speech.  Wh-questions did not appreciably differ in MaxF between the penultimate syllable (M= ·, SD = ·) and the final syllable (M= ·, SD = ·), consistent with the prosodic contour of wh-questions in adult-directed speech.  This demonstrates that MaxF provides information infants could use to distinguish polar interrogatives from declaratives and wh-questions, but not declaratives from wh-questions.  Pitch excursion.  Independent samples t-tests revealed a significant difference in pitch excursion between polar interrogatives and declaratives (t() = ·, p < ·) and wh-questions (t() = ·, p < ·).  However, there was no significant difference in pitch excursion between declaratives and wh-questions (t() = ·, p = ·).  Polar interrogatives had an average pitch excursion of · Hz (SD = · Hz), declaratives had an average pitch excursion of –· Hz (SD = · Hz), and wh-questions had an average pitch excursion of –· Hz (SD = · Hz) across the final two syllables.  The positive excursion for polar interrogatives indicates a pitch rise, whereas the negative excursion for declaratives indicates a pitchDuration.  Analyses revealed a significant main effect of Syllable Position for all three comparisons.  There was also a non-significant trend for Sentence Type for declaratives compared to polar interrogatives (p = ·) (see Tables – for details of the ANOVAs).  The penultimate syllables did not appreciably differ in duration for polar interrogatives (M= · ms, SD = · ms) compared to declaratives (M= · ms, SD = · ms.  t() = ·, p = ·) or wh-questions (M= · ms, SD = · ms.  t() = ·, p = ·).  Final syllable durations in declaratives (M= ·, SD = ·) tended to be longer than in polar interrogatives (M= ·, SD = ·), although this difference was a non-significant trend (t(·) = ·, p = ·).  This difference could be due to the fact that the last word was one syllable in most declaratives but two syllables in at least half the polar interrogatives.  These results are consistent with adult-directed speech, where declaratives and polar interrogatives also differ in overall duration, with polar interrogatives typically a little shorter than declaratives.  This has been shown in a variety of languages (e. g.  Manado Malay, Orkney English, and Dutch.  van Heuven & van Zanten, ).  Final syllable durations in wh-questions (M= ·, SD = ·) also tended to be longer than in polar interrogatives (M= ·, SD = ·), although this difference was not significant (t(·) = ·, p = ·).  In contrast, final syllables (M= · ms, SD = · ms) were significantly longer than penultimate syllables (M= · ms, SD = · ms) in both declaratives and polar interrogatives, although this durational pattern did not significantly differ across sentence types.  These results suggest that duration would not be useful for distinguishing declaratives and wh-questions.  However, larger differences in duration, particularly in the final syllable, could make it easier for infants to acoustically distinguish between sentence types.  All three sentence types had positive difference scores (see Table ), indicating that the final syllable was longer for all three sentence types, although the difference scores were not significantly different between sentence types.  These results suggest that duration would not be useful for distinguishing declaratives and wh-questions.  Intensity.  Analyses revealed a significant main effect of Sentence Type for all three comparisons.  There was a significant Sentence Type by Syllable Position interaction for polar interrogatives compared to declaratives and wh-questions.  There was also a significant main effect of Syllable Position for polar interrogatives compared to declaratives and a non-significant trend toward a main effect of Syllable Position for polar interrogatives compared to wh-questions (see Tables – for details of the ANOVAs).  Polar interrogatives had slightly higher intensity than declaratives and wh-questions, across positions.  Intensity was significantly higher for polar interrogatives (M= ·, SD = ·) than for declaratives (M= ·, SD = ·.  t(·) = ·, p = ·) and wh-questions (M= ·, SD = ·.  t(·) = ·, p < ·) in the final syllable, and also in the penultimate syllable for polar interrogatives (M= ·, SD = ·) compared to wh-questions (M= ·, SD = ·.  t(·) = ·, p < ·), as well as a non-significant trend towards a difference from declaratives (M= ·, SD = ·.  t(·) = ·, p = ·).  In addition, declaratives had higher intensity than wh-questions in the final and the penultimate syllable.  declaratives (Final.  M= ·, SD = ·.  Penultimate.  M= ·, SD = ·).  wh-questions (Final.  M= ·, SD = ·.  Penultimate.  M= ·, SD = ·).  Polar interrogatives show corresponding rises in intensity and pitch consistent with findings on the correlation between intensity and other prosodic measures (Fernald, ).  Therefore, intensity appears to be a reliable cue for making sentence-type distinctions in conjunction with other prosodic cues.  Summary.  Similar to adult-directed speech, in infant-directed speech polar interrogatives differed from declaratives and wh-questions in pitch on the final two syllables, and showed a non-significant trend towards a difference in duration.  Polar interrogatives were characterized by higher mean and max pitch, and higher intensity on the final syllable.  In contrast, declaratives and wh-questions tended to demonstrate longer duration on the final syllable, although this difference was not statistically significant.  In addition, the only prosodic cue that distinguished between declaratives and wh-questions was intensity, with wh-questions displaying a slightly lower intensity than declaratives.  Polar interrogatives do not significantly differ from declaratives or wh-questions in the penultimate syllable, and both declaratives and wh-questions had significantly longer final syllables compared to penultimate syllables.  These results suggest that prosodic differences between polar interrogatives and both declaratives and wh-questions are controlled largely by the final syllable and its relation to the penultimate syllable.  This suggests that there is insufficient prosodic information to distinguish between declaratives and wh-questions in infant-directed speech.  However, sentence-final prosody does provide information that distinguishes polar interrogatives from declaratives and wh-questions in infant-directed speech, a point we return to below.  <Conclusion> DISCUSSION.  This analysis revealed significant differences between declaratives and polar interrogatives for MeanF, MaxF, pitch excursion, and intensity, and a non-significant trend between sentence types for differences in duration.  Conversely, the only significant difference between declaratives and whquestions was intensity.  However, intensity patterned differently in polar interrogatives and wh-questions in comparison to declaratives, with declaratives and polar interrogatives showing similar intensity profiles.  Collectively, these results demonstrate that prosodic information is in principle available to distinguish between declaratives and polar interrogatives.  While intensity could be a basis for also discriminating whquestions and declaratives, it is not obvious how intensity would be used more broadly to distinguish declaratives from interrogatives since it patterns differently across wh-questions and polar interrogatives.  The situation we have just described highlights the challenges in developing a comprehensive account of how infants could use prosody to make useful sentence-type discriminations.  Although Analysis  shows that a variety of prosodic cues provide information that infants could use to distinguish between declaratives and polar interrogatives, it remains unclear how useful these combinations of cues are for actually categorizing individual utterances.  We address this question in Analysis .  ANALYSIS .  SENTENCE CLASSIFICATION FROM PROSODIC INFORMATION.  Analysis  revealed that there are different prosodic patterns between declaratives and polar interrogatives when considering groups of sentences, but the analyses were not designed to address to what degree any of the cues individually, or in combination, are useful for categorizing individual sentences.  To investigate this, in Analysis  we used a simple linear discrimination model, using half the sentences as a training set and evaluating categorization success with the other half.  To reduce the dimensionality of the data, we first carried out a Principal Components Analysis (PCA) on the acoustic measures.  This is a fairly simple classification technique that provides a first attempt to assess how well these acoustic measures classify actual sentences into declaratives and interrogatives.  PCA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS.  We used PCA to standardize and assess thirteen variables which comprise acoustic properties of declaratives and interrogatives.  Penultimate Syllable MinF, Final Syllable MinF, Penultimate Syllable MaxF, Final Syllable MaxF, Penultimate Syllable MeanF, Final Syllable MeanF, Penultimate Syllable Duration, Final Syllable Duration, Penultimate Syllable Intensity, Final Syllable Intensity, Overall Minimum Pitch (across penultimate and final syllables), Overall Maximum Pitch (across penultimate and final syllables), and Mean F Difference Score (Final syllable MeanF – Penultimate syllable MeanF).  PCA is a procedure analogous to factor analysis with orthogonal rotation.  however, devoid of theory, PCA seeks to create latent scores that maximize the variance explained between the variables.  Since PCA creates uncorrelated (orthogonal) scores, it can play an important role in reducing the dimensionality of many correlated variables that if modeled individually would suffer from multicollinearity.  In this analysis, we used PCA so as to incorporate elements of all the variables into the eventual logistic regression model without concern for the multicollinearity of these related variables.  The number of component scores was selected based on the scree plot of the eigenvalues.  Four components were considered, comprising approximately % of the variance in the variables.  Variable loadings on each component were examined to determine the make-up of each score.  Component  was primarily a function of Final Syllable Duration.  Component  was a moderate loading on all the variables excluding Mean F Difference Score, Penultimate Syllable Duration, Penultimate and Final Syllable Intensity.  Component  was predominantly composed of Difference Score, and had moderate loadings on all variables excluding Overall Minimum Pitch, Overall Maximum Pitch, Final Syllable MinF, Final Syllable Duration, Penultimate and Final Syllable Intensity.  Component  was primarily a function of Penultimate Syllable Duration and had moderate loadings on Mean F Difference Score and Penultimate MinF.  See Table  for the four composite scores used in Analysis  (and see Table A in the ‘Appendix’ for the complete table of loadings).  Before presenting the linear classifier results that use the principal components (PCs), we first present results that verify that these principal components do indeed correlate with sentence type.  We conducted two separate linear regressions using the R ‘glm’ function with the binomial link function. 