The English spelling system is notoriously difﬁcult to master, because as well as having regular relationships between sounds and spelling (e. g. , the sound [z] is written as z, as in zoo or quiz), it also has numerous inconsistent and irregular relationships (e. g. , [z] can also be written as s or x, as in bees or xylophone).  However, the apparent “chaos” of English spelling is less extensive if larger scale patterns are considered (Kessler & Treiman, 2003).  For example, some spellings can be conditioned by their position in a word, and/or by their adjacent letters (e. g. , word-initial [kh] is usually written c before a, o, and u, but k before e and i).  In other cases, a word’s morphological structure can inﬂuence its spelling.  For example, a word’s inﬂectional ending can determine the spelling of its last few letters, regardless of its pronunciation.  This can lead to different spellings for the endings for words such as purest (a superlative) and purist (a person), but the same spellings for the endings for words such as laughed and smiled (both regular past-tense verbs), or laughs and smiles (both plural nouns, or third-person singularAs discussed in more detail below, major theoretical and empirical accounts of spelling development suggest that writers learn quite early that plural nouns and third-person singular verbs should be spelled with a ﬁnal –s in English.  However, there is growing evidence that these simple rules may not be used at all by many children, and even not by some adults (Bourassa, Beaupre, & MacGregor, 2011.  Kemp & Bryant, 2003).  In direct contrast to conventional assumptions, many children and even adults may rely instead on individual, word-speciﬁc spellings to get these endings right.  Further, whether or not these morphological rules are used may vary with the level of education attained in adulthood (Mitchell, Kemp, & Bryant, 2011).  For people who do apply these spelling rules, it is not known when their application begins or how it progresses.  The aim of this study was thus to examine, for the ﬁrst time, both overall performance and individual differences in the application of two seemingly simple morphological spelling rules, by participants in primary school, secondary school, and adulthood.  CONVENTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE ACQUISITION OF INFLECTIONAL ENDINGS.  Conventional stage-based models of English spelling development hold that children learn to spell simple inﬂectional endings such as –s, –ed, –er, and –ing by about the age of 9 to 10 years (Ehri, 1986, 1992, 1997.  Frith, 1985.  Gentry, 1982.  Gentry & Gillet, 1993.  Henderson & Templeton, 1986).  There is some evidence that children’s initial spelling of inﬂectional endings improves quite quickly, and is usually correct by the end of primary school, in studies of both naturalistic spelling (e. g. , Green, McCutchen, Schwiebert, Quinlan, Eva-Wood, & Juelis, 2003.  Varnhagen, McCallum, & Burstow, 1997) and spelling to dictation (Leong, 2009.  Walker & Hauerwas, 2006).  For example, the regular plural ending –s appears to be acquired reasonably well in the ﬁrst 2 years of writing experience (e. g. , Read, 1986.  Treiman, 1993), although third-person singular –s appears to take longer to get right (Leong, 2009.  Turnbull, Deacon, & Kay-Raining Bird, 2011).  However, a closer look at these and other data reveals that the acquisition of inﬂectional endings is not as rapid or complete as these conventional stage-based spelling models would claim.  For example, the ﬁrst graders in Treiman’s (1993) and Turnbull et al. ’s (2011) studies occasionally used –z for plurals ending in the sound [z].  Green et al.  (2003) found that even though overall mean rates of correctness were 86%–92%, only 61% to 76% of their individual third- and fourth-grade participants spelled plural noun inﬂections correctly, and Sterling (1983) observed phonetic spellings of inﬂectional endings in children as old as 12 years.  Many of the correct spellings in the studies reviewed above might come from children’s store of rote-learned orthographic forms.  It is therefore important also to test the spelling of novel words, whose orthographic representation cannot be retrieved from memory.  For example, Beers and Beers (1992) asked children in school Grades 1 to 6 to spell inﬂected pseudowords such as guds, and found that the correct use of the plural inﬂection –s was very similar across grade levels, but not at ceiling (approximately 80%).  Further, in previous studies, children may simply have been using a particular spelling for a certain sound pattern, regardless of its morphological status.  The only way to rule out this possibility is to compare children’s spelling of both uninﬂected and inﬂected words.  In a large longitudinal study that made this comparison for another inﬂection, the regular past-tense –ed, Nunes, Bryant, and Bindman (1997a) found that children learned to spell this ending only very gradually, between the ages of 6 to 10 years.  They moved from sound-based spelling (e. g. , kist for kissed), to applying –ed indiscriminately to verbs and nonverbs (e. g. , kissed but also sofed for soft), then just to verbs (whether regular or irregular, e. g. , sleped for slept), and ﬁnally only to regular verbs.  In a second study, this gradual pattern of acquisition was also shown to occur in the spelling of pseudowords (Nunes, Bryant, & Bindman, 1997b), where stored word knowledge could not be used.  These ﬁndings suggest that without directly contrasting uninﬂected and inﬂected word forms, the ability to spell inﬂected endings correctly can be easily overestimated.  LEARNING TO SPELL THE INFLECTIONAL ENDING –s.  The –s endings of regular plural nouns and third-person singular verbs constitute two of the simplest spelling rules in English (especially when applied to onesyllable words, as in most of the research).  To reiterate, regular plural (inﬂected) nouns may be pronounced with a ﬁnal [s] (as in bricks) or [z] (as in bees), or with [ɪz] (as in boxes).  However, they are always written with a ﬁnal –s. 