 Many high-risk, high-consequence technical environments, including air trafﬁc control, hydroelectric power generation, and emergency services, are characterized by time pressure, uncertainty, and dynamic relationships between components (Orasanu & Connolly, 1993).  The safe and efﬁcient management of these environments is reliant upon effective communication between operators, where any communication error has the potential for a signiﬁcant loss (Australian Transport Safety Bureau, 2007).  The process of communication within such domains is inherently a joint activity between communicative partners (Clark, 1994.  Clark & Schaefer, 1989).  Models of dialogue structure, such as the collaborative model (Clark, 1994.  Clark & Brennan, 1991.  Clark & Schaefer, 1987, 1989.  Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986), emphasize that both communicative partners have a shared responsibility to ensure that information exchanged has been appropriately heard and understood before the conversation proceeds.  A communicative exchange involves two distinct stages.  the presentation of information and the grounding of that information (Clark & Schaefer, 1987).  During the presentation stage, the sender will provide information for the receiver to interpret and from which meaning can be derived.  During the grounding stage, the sender and receiver collaborate to ensure that the receiver has understood the sender’s intended message (Clark & Brennan, 1991.  Clark & Schaefer, 1987).  For grounding to take place, the receiver must demonstrate evidence of understanding to the sender, and the sender must accept the evidence as true.  When the process of grounding is successful, the utterance from the sender is referred to as “common ground” between the two communicative participants (Clark & Schaefer, 1987, p.  19).  MISCOMMUNICATION.  Although the objective of any communicative transaction is to ensure mutual understanding between all participants (Dascal & Berenstein, 1987), communication has been identiﬁed as a contributing factor in a signiﬁcant proportion of errors within many high-risk industries (Kim, Park, Han, & Kim, 2010).  For example, Billings and Cheaney (1981) noted that information transfer difﬁculties were a primary factor in over 70% of cases reported to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Aviation Safety Reporting System.  Similarly, Greenberg et al.  (2007) reported that miscommunication contributed to almost a quarter of surgical malpractice claims that led to patient harm.  Miscommunication is the broad term used to encompass the various types of communicative problems that can occur in discourse (Skantze, 2005).  There are two main types of miscommunication.  misunderstandings and nonunderstandings (Hirst, McRoy, Heeman, Edmonds, & Horton, 1994).  In a misunderstanding, receivers are under the incorrect assumption that they have understood the instruction and thus remain unaware that an error in discourse has occurred (Hirst et al. , 1994.  Skantze, 2005).  In contrast, a nonunderstanding refers to instances where a receiver does not obtain any meaningful interpretation of a message or is unable to select from two or more interpretations of a message (Skantze, 2005).  A nonunderstanding involves conscious awareness of a partial or complete lack of understanding and can be disclosed or concealed (Weigand, 1999).  A disclosed nonunderstanding occurs when a receiver fails to understand a message and alerts the sender that the message has not been understood.  In contrast, a concealed nonunderstanding occurs when the receiver fails to understand a message, but deceptively conceals this state of nonunderstanding from the sender (Weigand, 1999).  THE READBACK/HEARBACK COMMUNICATIVE PROTOCOL.  While nonunderstandings can occur in many different types of communicative exchanges, they can also threaten the effectiveness of the readback/hearback protocol.  This is a communications procedure that speciﬁes how verbal instructions are to be delivered and conﬁrmed over the radio/telephone (Prinzo & Britton, 1993).  Used in many different high-risk operational environments, including aviation, electricity transmission control, hydroelectric power generation, and more recently, in some healthcare settings, this protocol is used to reduce operator error and maintain the integrity of communication processes (Prabhakar et al. , 2012.  Prinzo & Britton, 1993).  This four-step protocol is initiated when a sender transmits a verbal message to a receiver (Federal Aviation Administration, 2015, Section 2-4-3).  For example, an air trafﬁc controller might send the following instruction to a pilot.  “Aircraft X, turn left to a heading of zero three zero” (Barshi & Farris, 2013, p.  2).  The receiver is then required to actively listen to the instruction before repeating the instruction verbatim back to the sender (known as the readback).  In the aviation context, a pilot would respond to the air trafﬁc controller with “Turning left to a heading of zero three zero, Aircraft X. ” The sender is then expected to listen to the readback to ensure that it has been repeated correctly, which is referred to as the hearback portion of the exchange (Cushing, 1995. 