INTRODUCTION.  Increasingly, there are calls – in contexts of the global, geopolitical South especially – for decoloniality, and there is a respectable and growing body of literature in disciplines such as history, sociology, literature, philosophy and linguistics that are taking the ‘decolonial turn’ (Maldonado-Torres 2011).  Quijano (2000) introduced the notion of decoloniality to emphasize the need to move away from ‘continuing’ coloniality – what Mignolo (1995) refers to as ‘the darker side of modernity’, distinguishing four axes relevant to the enduring colonial matrix of power.  • economic (appropriating land, and control of the economy).  • political (maintaining authority).  • civic life (where gender and sexuality are controlled with Western heteropatriarchal discursive practices).  and • epistemological (pertaining to subjectivity, identity, control, distortion and erasure of knowledge).  In Maldonado-Torres’ (2011.  2) words, Coloniality .  .  .  refers to long-standing patterns of power that emerged as a result of colonialism, but that define culture, labor, intersubjective relations and knowledge production well beyond the strict limits of colonial administrations.  Thus, coloniality survives colonialism.  Decoloniality, then, is a political and epistemic (and spiritual) project to delink from modern colonial designs (Mignolo 2011).  It is the dismantling of relations of power and conceptions of knowledge that foment the reproduction of racial, gender and geo-political hierarchies that came into being or found new and more powerful forms of expression in the modern/colonial world.  (Maldonado-Torres 2011.  117) The decolonial turn has many roots and offshoots.  ‘heightened perception of the linkages between colonialism, racism and other forms of dehumanization in the twentieth century, the formation of ethnic movements of empowerment and feminisms of colour, and the appearance of queer decolonial theorizing’ (Maldonado-Torres 2011.  2).  The many manifestations of decoloniality share a perception of coloniality as a continuing concern in the contemporary world.  An important dimension of enduring coloniality is the ‘knowledge’ we have of our embodied, gendered, racialized and sexualized selves, and the praxes/ practices through which these selves can be inserted into the everyday.  Concepts of gender and race that evolved out of imperial coloniality remain tightly imbricated in contemporary forms of coloniality/modernity.  The ‘voices’ with which we speak ourselves and the scripts that we follow in these respects remain those of colonial discourse.  Conceptualizations of gender that articulate with race are reproduced through specific global sociopolitical forms of political organization, as well as circulated across the globe in Western heteropatriarchal discourses of entertainment and thought.  Mohanty (2003.  514) notes how modern-day manifestations of coloniality ‘global capitalism and neoliberal policies writes its script especially in the bodies and lives of women and girls from the third world’.  In the postapartheid context of South Africa, the intersectionalities of race, gender and economic disparities underlie widespread practices of patriarchy, rape and sexual discrimination.  However, despite the intimacy and carnality of the coloniality nexus of sex, gender and race, Arboleda-Rıos (2014) notes that ‘the ways in which lesbian, homosexual, bisexual, transgender and/or queer subjects confront interlocking systems of oppression have been consistently disregarded’ by the decoloniality collective.  Furthermore, the connections between enduring racialization and the production of race and sexuality remain in need of explication.  Mbembe (2017.  55) makes the point that ‘our critique of modernity will remain incomplete if we fail to grasp that the coming of modernity coincided with the appearance of the principle of race’.  He goes on to say that ‘[i]n order to reproduce itself, the principle of race depends on an assemblage of practices whose immediate and direct target is the body of the Other and whose scope is life in general’ (2017.  56) – including, importantly, sexuality.  In her much-cited, seminal work on decolonial feminism, Lugones (2010) explicates the mutual co-constitution of gender and race in practices of slavery and colonization.  And Sally Kitch (2009.  169) notes how ‘sexual difference and the gender binary became basic tenets of the ideology of racial hierarchy and white supremacy during processes of nation formation in the West’.  Gunkel (2010.  11) explains that, through hypersexualizing the (black) Other, ‘colonialism constituted race as a sexualised category, and sexuality a racialized category.  However, it was not only heterosexuality that was racially constructed, but also divergent sexualities’.  Drag and decoloniality.  One area in which these complex interactions are literally on show and open to reflection is the drag performance.  Drag shows are arguably a form of decolonial aesthetic or decolonial aestheSis (Mignolo and Vasquez 2013), a dimension of decoloniality that seeks to replace the coloniality of traditional aesthetics with alternative ways of sensing and perceiving.  They are typical instances of performances that seek to parody and disrupt colonialities of gender or sexuality, by showing that they are in no way ‘natural’ or stable, as we are led to believe.  Although much has been written on drag queens, less is known about how drag kings go about the task of disrupting sexuality and gender.  A drag king is most often (but not always) a woman who dresses up in costume that is recognizably masculine, and who performs theatrically in that costume (Halberstam 1997, 1998, 2001).  Mu~noz (1999.  99) remarks on how queer performances allow performers and their audiences (through disidentification) to resist ‘the interpellating call of ideology that fixes a subject within the state power apparatus’.  Halberstam (1998) argues that the subversive power of the drag performance lies in the fact that drag parades discontinuities between gender and sex or appearance and reality, but doesn’t allow these discontinuities to be read as dysfunction (as they would be in ordinary circumstances).  Instead, these inconsistencies become a site of gender creativity (cf.  Butler 1996), and there is thus a strong claim here to be disrupting normativities of masculinity through holding them up for laughter.  However, genres (including performance genres) are sites of social (re) production – of people, persona, place and registers – as much as they invite social change.  They are therefore also a potential carrier of global-colonial structurations (global circulation).  Shome (2000.  367) has argued that ‘cultural products such as texts, .  .  .  legitimize and reproduce – the genre allows gender and race to shift location, and to appear anew’ thereby reproducing patterns in ‘the everyday organization of social and cultural relations [which] function to confer benefits and systemic advantage to whites’ (cf.  Williams and Stroud 2014).  The question then becomes in what ways, and to what extent, do performance genres such as drag king further a decolonial critique of the colonialities of the body.  that is, gender, sexuality and race and their embodiment.  In what sense can they be seen as articulations of a decolonial aesthetics.  Do drag shows break ‘silences, disrup[ting] dominant narratives and create a transformative consciousness’, as Cervantes and Salda~na claim to be the case for hip hop and nueva cancion (2015.  84).  Do they provide a means to ‘delink from coloniality and exercise a “decolonial imaginary”’ (Perez 1999.  5).  In this paper, we approach these questions with a close analysis of four excerpts from two performances by a troupe of drag kings called Bros B4 Ho’s (sic)2 who promote themselves as ‘South Africa’s first ever Drag King troupe’. 3 In interviews the motivation behind their performances is presented as clearly political in nature (OUT Africa Magazine 2012) and, on the group’s Facebook page, the kings explain that they ‘use satire, irony, and parody .  .  .  to subvert cultural hegemony and conventions and empower them[selves]’.  It’s clear that, to them, resisting and disrupting hegemony is a big part of their project.  On the basis of our analysis of the drag king troupe, we argue that deconstructions of gendered relationships, or the remapping of sexualities across gender categories, or the erasure of simple gender binaries oftentimes implicate the continued production and circulation of racial and sexual hierarchy.  In fact, we make a stronger claim.  that the continued circulation of stereotypes of race and sexuality are the very means whereby heteronormativity is deconstructed in these performances.  In other words, not performing blackness is a prerequisite for the performativity of masculinity.  At the same time, we show that there are moments of genre rupture in the drag king performance that destabilize the simple reproduction of colonialities of race and sexuality.  In making this argument, we take an approach to language and social life inspired by the work of Frantz Fanon, a post-colonial philosopher and writer born in French-colonized Martinique, who shaped the way we think about colonialism and anti-black racism today.  His most well-known works were published in the 1950s and 1960s, largely in response to his experiences of racism when studying in France, as well as his involvement in the Algerian National Liberation Front fighting against French colonization.  In the very first line in the very first chapter of Black Skin, White Masks he notes the ‘fundamental importance’ of language, considering it ‘essential for providing us with one element in understanding the black man’s dimension of being-forothers’ (2008.  1).  In particular, we use a Fanonian perspective on body, violence and language to frame our discussion of performance, genre and subjectification in the next section.  Following this, we present the drag troupe together with a brief review of some key literature on drag.  This will provide the foundation for a study of two performances in Cape Town.  We conclude the paper with a discussion on the implications of drag for decoloniality (informed through a Fanonian stance), and the possible contribution a Fanonian approach can make to sociolinguistics more generally.  <Middle> A FANONIAN LENS ON SOCIOLINGUISTICS.  Although little used by linguists (but cf.  Burnett and Milani in press), a Fanonian approach to language opens up some enticing possibilities for thinking about the role of language in the global circulation of enduring racialization and its semiotics.  Central concepts in Fanon’s thought pertain to the body, violence and language, and, even though Fanon wrote almost 70 years ago, his accounts of the existential formation of race retain a troubling currency in contemporary society.  The central problematic of Fanon’s oeuvre is the fact of blackness as a White semiotic construction, one that depends on, and is continually reinforced by, (failed) encounters with whiteness.  Blackness is forged on the anvil of structural whiteness in a violence of language, and ‘woven out of a thousand details, anecdotes and stories’ (Fanon 1967.  111).  Race, in Mbembe’s (2017) words, is an assemblage, cobbled together in the intersubjective, social world of culture, history, language and economics – a world symbolically and semiotically constituted by humans.  It is this world of representation and interaction that determines the forms in which blackness may emerge.  Fanon calls the process of fabricating blackness sociogeny, whereby the symbolic and semiotic is made materiality and flesh.  The most famous example of sociogeny is Fanon’s telling of how he is interpellated, while walking the streets of Paris, by a young (white) Parisian boy who shouts.  ‘Look, a negro!’ This hailing, which Fanon at first found amusing, alerted him to how his body – his general corporeal schema – had in that moment been overtaken by a racial epidermal schema.  .  .  .  my body was given back to me sprawled out, distorted, recolored, clad in mourning in that white winter day.  The Negro is an animal, the Negro is bad, the Negro is mean, the Negro is ugly.  (Fanon 1967.  112) When Fanon recounts this story, he notes how he is made to appear to himself as an epidermis, a becoming-skin, a historical-racial body schema (seen through a third person consciousness).  He contrasts this ‘self’ as a becomingskin with a body-schema, or a phenomenological sense of self, that normally emerges out of the everyday ‘remnants of feelings and notions of the tactile, vestibular, kinesthetic or visual nature’ (1967.  91), ‘owned’ by the perceiving and acting subject (cf.  Merleau-Ponty 1996).  The epidermilization, or becoming skin (Fanon’s concept of the body), is at the same time an internalization.  In fact, as pointed out by Gorgis (2015.  86) ‘“becoming-skin” suspends rather than reinforces the distinction between interiority and exteriority’.  Becoming skin is thus ‘the process by which the exteriority of the skin internalizes affects’ (2015.  86).  Fanon coins the term scissiparite (self-division or self cleaving) or fissiparousness (a reproductive process by means of fission) to capture this form of enforced subjectification.  Fanon refers to becoming-skin, as living in the zone of non-being.  The Black, reduced to inhabiting a two-dimensional body, has no inner life that is recognized as interactively engaging in his/her own subjectification.  There is no recognition in the sociogeny of Blackness that s/he is anything more than surface appearances.  One implication of this is that, if the Black has no inner life worth engaging with intersubjectively, then everything that can be ‘known’ can be sourced from his/her surface.  Thus, the Black is a victim of epistemic closure, ‘sealed in a world without reciprocity or the intersubjectively social’ (Gordon 2015.  48–49), existing only in the zone of non-being.  In order to become fully human, to have a recognized inner life that goes beyond the interiorization of the exteriority of the racial epidermal schema, the Black subject must transcend the boundaries of race.  However, there is a repeated ‘failure’ of the black body to enter the world – to emerge into a world where the standards of humanity are determined by and as whiteness – other than as an object.  In Black Skin, White Masks, each chapter elaborates on a different aspect of the failure of black attempts to gain recognition of their humanity.  With respect to language, Fanon (2008.  3) notes how ‘the black man who has lived in France for a certain time returns home radically transformed’.  ‘speaking pidgin means imprisoning the black man and perpetuating a conflictual situation where the white man infects the black man with extremely toxic foreign bodies’ (2008. 