1.  INTRODUCTION.  LIVING-IN-DIVERSITY, BEYOND THE RAINBOW.  In the early 1990s, anti-apartheid stalwart Desmond Tutu coined the metaphor of ‘the rainbow nation’ to describe the ‘miracle’ of South African democracy and the diversity of its people.  The image of the rainbow also evoked, probably unintentionally, a well-known Euro-American symbol of LGBT+ identity and pride.  the rainbow ﬂag.  And indeed, it was the complex intersection of these two global discourses – multiculturalism and LGBT+ rights – that positioned South Africa, a country at the southern-most tip of Africa, as a model of how to engage with diversity (Munro 2012).  The constitutional recognition of LGBT+ rights was a milestone in this process.  In 1994, South Africa became the ﬁrst nation to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in its constitution.  This opened the way for a wide range of legal challenges, culminating in the legalization of same-sex marriages in 2006.  However, legal provisions and rights are one thing, the realities of living-in-diversity are quite another.  Today, the image of the rainbow nation is heavily contested.  socio-economic inequalities, racism, and white supremacy are persistent.  and various forms of violence – systemic violence as imbedded in institutions, but also physical violence, especially towards women and sexual minorities – are deeply disturbing aspects of everyday life.  It is in this larger political context that we look at black queer visibilities and philosophies of hospitality.  While previous work on this topic has focused on metropolitan contexts (Matebeni 2011.  Livermon 2014), our ﬁeldwork took place in a non-metropolitan space.  a small town in the largely rural Eastern Cape province, about 500 kilometres from the next metropolitan centre.  We have argued previously that it is essential to pay attention to places beyond ‘the city’ – a privileged space in the sociolinguistic imagination – if our aim is to address existing ‘imbalances and marginalization’ in representation and theorization (Milani and Lazar, introduction to this Special Issue.  see also Deumert and Mabandla 2016).  In addition to moving the gaze from the city to a non-metropolitan space, we also explore the question of how to formulate ‘southern’ or ‘decolonial’ theories of diversity and hospitality.  We draw, broadly, on the work of Latin-American scholars such as Walter Mignolo (2000) and Ramon Grosfoguel (2011) who have argued for an approach they call ‘critical border thinking’.  This approach moves beyond Southern and Northern fundamentalisms in developing a dialogical perspective that challenges the monologic universalism of Northern theory, and provincializes (Chakrabarty 2000) such knowledge through a sustained dialogue with Southern epistemologies (also Sousa Santos 2014).  The article is structured as follows.  in section 2, we discuss what we call ‘the politics of inclusivity’, one of the core political strategies of the South African liberation movement.  We reflect on the ways in which diverse sexualities have been contested, and accepted, in South Africa (and Africa more broadly), and how a politics of inclusivity allowed diverse knowledges and ways-of-being to become visible.  Section 3 introduces the rural town of Forestville (a pseudonym).  Section 4 provides a discussion of the theoretical lens through which we look at the visibility of diversity.  hospitality.  It is in this section that we engage quite explicitly with the idea of ‘critical border thinking’.  we bring everyday knowledges of hospitality (as expressed in proverbs, talk and language), into conversation with academic philosophy (especially the work of Jacques Derrida).  Section 5 further explores, on the basis of interview data, the role of curiosity in hospitality.  curiosity has the potential for engagement, for dialogue and knowledge creation, but can also create – in the form of gossip – in-hospitality and thus violence.  Section 6 turns to the possibility of acceptance without judgement (a local discourse of ‘live and let live’), as well as the persistence of discrimination.  In the conclusion, we argue that – despite ambivalences and tensions – these diverse non-metropolitan discourses can help us in theorizing the idea of hospitality – moving it away from a somewhat repressive sense of duty and obligation (as evident in academic philosophy) to an affect-driven, lived and everyday praxis.  A note on terminology.  in an essay titled How Not to write about Queer in South Africa, Zethu Matebeni (2014) reminds us about the difficulties of naming.  Identities, sexual or otherwise, are inherently diverse and fragmented, shaped by silences as well as stereotypes that are perpetuated in both popular and academic writing.  Reflecting on names and naming is thus essential.  Also addressing the question of terminology, Thabo Msibi (2013) has argued that the global terms gay/lesbian – as well as the abbreviation LGBT+ – do not necessarily capture local realities.  At the same time, however, these global terms have been appropriated locally and are being re-shaped through discourse (Livermon 2012).  In our discussion we generally use the terms that are employed by those we spoke to.  however, we also use ‘queer’ as an analytic category, referring not to any defined or labelled sexuality, but to ‘a critical space that pushes the boundaries of what is embraced as normative’ (Matebeni and Pereira 2014.  7).  As a general placeholder we use the acronym LGBT+, indexing the open-ended diversity of sexualities through the [+] symbol. 2 <Middle> 2.  THE POLITICS OF INCLUSIVITY, LGBT+ RIGHTS AND PUBLIC ATTITUDES.  Andrew Masondo, national commissar of the African National Congress (henceforth ANC) in exile, referred to the liberation movement as a ‘big bus’.  The metaphor of the ‘big bus’ emphasized the fact that in the struggle against apartheid, people had to come together.  they had to accommodate their differences and form a diverse but united front.  In other words, it was imperative to create a broad sense of inclusiveness and belonging, and to be hospitable to diverse perspectives.  This had important political consequences.  The ANC, originally a middle-class male organization, embraced progressive politics from early on.  women’s rights and worker’s rights were an integral part of its politics from the 1950s, and – since the late 1980s – LGBT+ rights.  The latter were put on the agenda by vocal LGBT+ activists within the liberation movement.  Simon Nkoli, Beverly Ditsie and Alfred Machela.  However, inclusivity can be contested and there were concerns in the early 1990s that the progressive stance of the organization’s leadership – many of whom had encountered LGBT+ politics during exile in Europe or America – was perhaps not widely shared by the rank-and-file.  This view was expressed by Cheryl Carolus, then ANC Deputy Secretary General, at the launch of the National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality in 1995.  One must accept that the ANC is made up of very ordinary South Africans who bring with them many of the misinformed views, perspectives and prejudices that exist in society as a whole.  Those of us that support the equality clause need to make cognizance of this [fact that] our views as the leadership are not necessarily the one’s stated by the membership.  (cited in Dunton and Palmberg 1996.  47) In this article we wish to unsettle the leadership/membership dichotomy and argue that ‘very ordinary South Africans’ should not be seen as misinformed and prejudiced, struggling to embrace difference-of-being when it comes to issues of sexuality.  We argue that everyday knowledges about diversities (sexual and otherwise) should not be seen as conservative and backward, but can be at the vanguard not only of theory-making, but also of progressive politics.  It is not only ‘ordinary South Africans’ who have been portrayed as prejudiced, but also Africa as a whole.  International media, especially, have created a ‘simplistic opposition between homophobic Africa and a tolerant .  .  .  West’ (Awondo, Geschiere and Reid 2012.  149).  Similar discourses shape, at times, also scholarly engagement.  For example, in a recent review article Pierre de Vos (2015.  40) argues that the constitutional anti-discrimination clause did not help in changing ‘entrenched negative attitudes towards sexual minorities’ among ‘the majority of South African citizens’.  Discussions such as these are ultimately rooted in views of Africa (and Africans) as backward, in need of Northern modernity, education and development.  Yet statistics, such as the World Values Survey (see Adamczyk, Kim and Paradis 2015), suggest that attitudes did change over time, influenced not only by constitutional provisions but also by popular culture, with LGBT+ characters featuring in TV dramas, and celebrities openly declaring their sexualities.  Today, South Africans accept same-sex relations at rates that are not much different from those for the United States (Table 1).  While statistical data need to be interpreted with many pinches of salt – acknowledging bias in sample selection and wording of questions – they allow us to see broad changes in attitudinal patterns, and to understand that the South is just as dynamic as the North.  There is some indication that it is the urban, Christian middle classes, deeply shaped by the history of colonialism and persistent coloniality, who struggle most with their own prejudices.  The homophobia – as well as racism and xenophobia – of this group is one of the themes in K.  Sello Duiker’s (2001) novel The Quiet Violence of Dreams.  The novel’s black protagonist, Tshepo, challenges the idea that same-sex desire is ‘unAfrican’ and locates negative attitudes instead in (sub)urban middle-class milieus.  I mean, people always say that black culture is rigid and doesn’t accept things like homosexuals and lesbians.  You know the argument – it’s very unAfrican.  It’s a lot of crap.  In my experience that kind of thinking comes from urbanised blacks, people who’ve watered down the real origins of our culture and mixed it with Anglo-Saxon notions of the Bible.  It’s stupid to even suggest that homosexuality and lesbianism are foreign to black culture.  Long ago, long before whites, people were aware of blurs.  (cited in Hoad 2007.  105) The idea that pre-colonial Africa was quite different from contemporary urban milieus is supported in Marc Eppbrecht’s (2013 [2004]) monograph, Hungochani, as well as in Sylvia Tamale’s (2011) anthology, African Sexualities.  These texts show the complexities and diversities of African sexualities, suggesting that heteronormativity and homophobia, rather than diversity of sexual expression, might be the true colonial import (see also Reid 2013.  and the seminal work by Amadiume 1987).  That homophobic sentiments might be especially common among those who are considered ‘educated’ is also supported by Thabo Msibi’s (2009, 2013) work, which suggests that prejudice against LGBT+ people might be especially rampant at universities.  Similarly, the 2010–2014 South African data in the (above mentioned) World Values Survey suggests that such prejudice is a function of class position (which is closely linked to educational attainment).  when asked whether one would feel comfortable living next to ‘homosexuals’, 38 percent of South Africans answered in the negative.  However, the percentage rises to 47 percent for those who self-identify as ‘upper class’.  Historical sociologists and anthropologists writing about South Africa’s colonial (and postcolonial) middle class have often commented on the great emphasis this group places on ‘respectability’ – that is, Victorian values of ‘temperance, sobriety and moral rectitude’ (Mkhize 2016.  149).  Sexual desires, especially those not resulting in procreation, are excluded from this social space, a space that was shaped to a significant degree by Christian missionaries, their religious and educational institutions and the postcolonial re-instantiations of these institutions (Chitando and van Klinken 2016).  Thus, in early 2016, Rev.  Mpho Tutu, an ordained Anglican priest and daughter of Archbishop Desmond Tutu, had to quit the ministry after she married her female partner.  The reason was pressure from the Anglican Church of South Africa, which does not recognise same-sex marriages.  Northern missionaries continue to spread conservative discourses about homosexuality on the continent.  For example, draconian anti-LGBT+ legislation in Uganda was supported not only by middle-class evangelical Ugandans, but also by American missionaries (Awondo, Geschiere and Reid3.  FORESTVILLE.  FIELDWORK IN A MARGINALIZED AND DIVIDED TOWN.  The article draws on fieldwork that forms part of a larger, long-term project, going back to 2012 when we first began working in the rural towns of the Eastern Cape province, South Africa.  The main focus of our work has been on international migration, especially migrant traders, and the globalization of the countryside (Deumert and Mabandla 2016).  More recently, we began to look at diversities more broadly, including sexualities.  Our work took place in two different modes.  (a) a long-term, single-researcher ethnography (Mabandla).  and (b) an intermittent collaborative ethnography (Deumert and Mabandla).  This article presents material from the collaborative ethnography.  all observations and interviews cited were conducted as a team.  An important aspect of our collaboration has been the fact that we have different bodies.  black-male and white-female.  These bodies allow us access to different spaces, and bring with them different perspectives and different modes of interaction.  In analysing the recorded interviews and conversations, we take inspiration from recent proposals by, for example, Crispin Thurlow (2016) and Tommaso Milani (2015) to ‘queer’ discourse studies.  Queer, as noted in section 1, indexes a perspective that is intentionally anti-normative and anti-hegemonic.  In particular, queer approaches to discourse analysis challenge conventional concerns with representation and signification, and focus on the ‘more-thanrepresentational’ aspects of social life (Lorimer 2005).  This includes materiality, corporeality and, especially, affect.  The latter echoes Raymond Williams’ (1977.  132) ‘structures of feeling’.  ‘meanings and values as they are actively lived and felt’, focusing on ‘impulse, restraint and tone .  .  .  [the] affective elements of consciousness and relationship’ within the historicity of present power relations (see also Sharma and Tygstryp 2015).  In our analysis, we are especially interested in the ways in which feeling/affect are articulated in discourse.  that is, the ways in which talking about diversity is an affective-discursive practice (Wetherell 2013).  The data on which we draw was elicited mainly through interviews.  In addition, we draw on our own observations and experiences.  Such an approach might appear ‘anecdotal’ to the more empirically-minded sociolinguist, yet anecdotalism has a logic of its own and is important in achieving phenomenological understanding (Simons 1978.  Gallop 2002).  Forestville is what we call a ‘rural town’.  it is small (with a population of about 8000) and surrounded by farmland, both commercial and subsistence.  Its demographics – following the classifications used in the South African census (2011) – are predominately African (93%), with a small Coloured and white population.  (In South Africa, the category Coloured refers to people who were seen to be of ‘mixed’ or ‘creole’ ancestry. ) Forestville is a multilingual space.  isiXhosa is the majority language, but English and Afrikaans are also commonly used.  Like many other rural towns in South Africa, Forestville is a busy commercial centre.  On any given day the streets are full, and people from the surrounding villages and smaller towns arrive to shop at the many stores run by migrants from China, India, Bangladesh, Senegal, Somalia and Pakistan.  Diversity is palpable when walking down the streets.  it is a mix of old and new, modern and traditional, global and local.  Yet Forestville also remains a deeply divided place, and the racially exclusive networks of the apartheid era continue to shape daily life.  It is also a marginalized place, and poverty is significantly higher than in metropolitan centres.  Table 2 provides summary statistics for the municipal region where Forestville is located as well as comparative statistics for the nearest metropolitan centre, eThekwini/Queer visibilities are affected by the overall marginalized status of the area.  there are no LGBT+ support organizations or advocacy groups, and no annual Pride marches.  As a rural town with a fairly small population, Forestville has only a few public places that are available for sociable interaction and these are sharply divided according to race.  Zodwa, one of the people we interviewed, described – somewhat tongue-in-cheek – two places that are welcoming to black residents.  ‘the [hair] parlour and the tavern’.  Historically, white spaces, on the other hand, are generally seen as unwelcoming to black residents.  The racial exclusivity of such spaces is communicated not through words, but through corporeality and affect.  Menzi, a young black man who identifies as gay (see below), experiences these places not as homophobic, but as anti-black.  ‘[there are] racial issues .  .  .  you gonna get those stares, you are allowed to go in, but you just feel the [unwelcoming] vibes’ (Menzi).  Following Sara Ahmed (2004), we argue that such forms of affect (feeling welcomed/unwelcomed) circulate socially and historically.  the ‘vibe’ described by Menzi, is not just a personal feeling, it reflects the historical experience of racism – of being interpellated and seen as nothing but black.  It is the opposite of hospitality, a notion we explore in the remainder of this paper.  4.  BEYOND TOLERANCE.  HOSPITALITY Difference – of sexuality, race, language, citizenship and so forth – can be silenced through symbolic practices and institutions, through the patterns of everyday sociability, or through physical violence.  Sometimes, this silencing is almost invisible.  when diversity is tolerated, but not actually welcomed.  that is, when ‘you are allowed to go in, but you just feel the vibes’.  Tolerance – as a practice and specific form of affect – allows difference to exist but only within certain parameters.  There is always a threshold to tolerance, and tolerance thus masks underlying power relations (Altman 1971).  To move beyond the conditional acceptance of difference is at the heart of the ethics of hospitality.  Among the philosophers who have written about hospitality is Jacques Derrida (e. g.  2000, 2005.  Borradori 2003).  Derrida’s work, commonly referred to as poststructuralist, has relevance for a special issue on ‘perspectives from the South’.  Derrida, his prominence in Northern post-structuralism notwithstanding, cannot be understood simply as a Northern, metropolitan philosopher.  Rather, he should be seen as a border-thinker (in the sense outlined in section 1).  His work was shaped by growing up in Algeria.  not as a French colonialist but as an Algerian Jew and colonial subject.  The Southern aspect of his thinking, which is often silenced in discussions of his work, is perhaps clearest in Monolingualism of the Other (1996).  It is also evident in his work on hospitality which, as Andrew Shyrock (2009) has shown, stands in a tradition of North African moral thought.  Davinder Ahluwalia (2010) has further argued that the entanglement of North and South shaped poststructuralism more broadly and is at the root of its commitment to dismantle the epistemes of coloniality.  Poststructuralism provides a substantial critique of European universalism and emphasizes the importance of difference and singularity.  thus, disrupting, time and again, various forms of hegemonic/ imperialist thinking.  Its critical impetus notwithstanding, poststructuralism as an intellectual project is located within the Northern academy, an institution that is shaped by, and also shaping, the coloniality of knowledge.  We therefore need a second level of border thinking. 