INTRODUCTION.  There is growing research into relatively privileged forms of migration, such as that termed lifestyle migration.  a concept that frames such movements in terms of choice and possibility rather than necessity, and which acknowledges the role played by structural and economic conditions (Benson 2016).  Such studies have utilised migrant narratives to understand how the speakers make sense of their lives within that particular sociocultural context.  While other forms of migration, such as labour movements, have undergone analysis of positioning in interaction (De Fina 2006), there has been little attention paid towards interactive positioning in lifestyle migration contexts.  By integrating two datasets of discourse – one online and one face to face – this paper presents a grounded interpretation of how a British migrant couple in France jointly construct a narrative world that is both framed and disrupted by prevailing ideologies.  To date, lifestyle migration researchers are at work in a range of global contexts and migrant nationalities, including studies of British migration to destinations such as Spain (O’Reilly 2012), Portugal (Torkington 2015) and France (Benson 2011).  Within the British contexts there is some coherence across common themes of a search for a better life abroad, conceptualising a postmodern escape to a simpler life that nevertheless perceives such migration as a purchasable, consumption-driven commodity.  Yet we should be wary of viewing such migration unproblematically as privileged.  some migrants articulate the move in terms of constraint, particularly when the region has been selected due to lower property prices (Lawson 2016).  Migrants can also be vulnerable to economic and political developments, such as the uncertainty following the 2016 Brexit vote for the U. K.  to leave the European Union (EU).  This intersection of lifestyle and economic factors has led to criticism of the term lifestyle migration as imprecise (Huete, Mantecon and Estevez 2013), since it hinders consistent deﬁnitions.  Yet with such a varied array of lifestyle migration contexts, we might question whether precision is an essential component of the overall concept.  More clarity and theoretical consistency has been afforded by the recent trend to include choice and possibilities (Croucher 2012) as key aspects within the term lifestyle migration.  This acknowledges the role of economic capital as an available resource and allows lifestyle migration to be viewed through a broad analytical lens that accounts for variation in the ways that people take up the available resources.  The paper therefore takes the perspective of lifestyle migration as an ability to move elsewhere using resources that offer a choice of possibilities for a different, often better, lifestyle.  Further critiques have focused on the idea of lifestyle migration as an unproblematic form of independently chosen self-realisation.  Researchers such as Benson (2011) argue that the everyday realities of the new life can generate ambivalence between former imaginings and lived experiences, commonly seen alongside a desire to self-identify as distinct from one’s (British) compatriots, who are often presented along stereotypical lines.  This paper shows what a focus on language in interaction can reveal, particularly concerning the ways that such processes of distinction develop linguistically as dynamic aspects of self-representation.  While the concept of stance has usefully identiﬁed indexicality in language, for example Stockburger’s (2015.  237) exploration of stances against ‘stereotypical social types’, recent developments in positioning theory are more speciﬁcally tailored towards relations between the roles negotiated in interaction and prevailing social and moral themes.  Analysing positioning as a social action at three levels of the interaction offers scope for revealing more complex and dynamic identity representations at the level of the story (tale), the interaction (telling) and the wider ideological level.  The framework has already been tested in migration contexts, as seen in De Fina’s (2013) analysis of migrant orientations to ideologies about migration.  Yet the common dyad of interviewer-interviewee can miss the rich elasticity of identity representations that might emerge within joint interviews.  For example, Damari’s (2010) interview with a binational couple revealed variance in positioning between speakers with cultural and demographic differences.  Nonetheless, it is also possible for participants to share a culture and ideological stance, but to differ in their interpretations of how to represent their actions.  In this paper, I demonstrate what a positioning analysis can reveal about such variance, in the context of a British couple who positioned themselves in contrasting ways when their lived experiences aligned them with prevailing and negative cultural stereotypes.  This paper forms part of a larger study of British migrants living in the Ariege departement of France, with an overarching research question.  how do British migrants in Ariege, France, construct and define their identities in discourse.  This paper firstly examines data from a digital British support forum to show how an ideological landscape is visible in the online interactions of members.  This is followed by analysis of extracts from an interview with a British couple – both users of the forum – to explore how interactants differ in their negotiation around these ideologies.  The results add a new perception to our understanding of the dynamic and contextually emergent nature of the reporting of agency.  Speakers who share an overall perspective on the prevailing ideologies can nevertheless be at variance in how their representations of their actual lived experience match the idealised version of the ‘right’ kind of migrant.  THE SELF AND THE ‘OTHER’ IN BRITISH MIGRATION.  A thematic thread that runs through the literature on British lifestyle migration is that of intra-group distinction and stereotyping.  A report on global British emigration by Sriskandarajah and Drew (2006.  30) referred to a tendency for expatriate Britons to ‘distinguish themselves’ from stereotypical British communities who are seen as unwilling or unable to integrate.  Benson’s ethnographic studies in France drew attention to a similar theme of distinction that revolved around a particular ‘moral position’ among British migrants in the Lot departement of France (Benson 2011.  30), where ‘other’ Britons were described as unprepared, lacking cultural (especially linguistic) capital and showing dependence on each other.  Drake and Collard’s (2007.  28) research in Normandy similarly identified an ‘appropriate model of behaviour’ whereby respondents were keen to be seen as making an effort to speak the local language and integrate.  Such observations are not confined to local contexts, and O’Reilly (2001) acknowledged the media’s role in constructing stereotypes of the British in Spain.  In a recent corpus analysis of British press articles that referenced British migration to France, Lawson (2015) identified a pattern of negative representations that included frequent associations of the British with a difficulty or reluctance to speak French, a continuing reliance on British items and English speaking services, and references to British ‘ghetto’ communities.  Benson and Osbaldiston (2014) noted how these kinds of categorisations and distinctions against the ‘other’ are widespread within studies of lifestyle migration, not just British, with migrants seemingly conscious of how their chosen lifestyle and related activities represent social or cultural value within the search for a new life.  As symbolic value is applied to social actions, often in terms of being integrated (Lawson 2016), so an opportunity emerges for ideologies – opinions, explanations, norms or values of a ‘group-based, shared framework’ (van Dijk 1990.  177) – to develop into a recognised value system relating to (in)appropriate forms of migrant behaviour.  As speakers orient towards a particular evaluative stance, they contribute towards the construction and maintenance of the value system.  It has been acknowledged that lifestyle migration owes as much to structural opportunities as to agency (O’Reilly 2012), yet choice and agency are nevertheless intrinsic to lifestyle migration.  People make decisions of where and how to live, explaining and justifying their actions and choices when pursuing a new life.  There is therefore potential for reflexivity in how they interpret these actions and tell a particular version of themselves in narrative discourse.  For the British living in the rural Lot departement of France, Benson (2011.  40) concluded that migration was perceived as a ‘risky act’ through which the British were able to augment their sense of individual agency and achievement, self-presenting as ‘pioneers’ with ‘get up and go’.  Benson argued that the frequent assertion of their agency worked to keep any uncertainty and ambivalence, such as their continuing outsider status, at bay.  The notion of an ideal migrant against the stereotypical ‘other’ therefore presents a resource for positive self-identiﬁcation, and one that is of particular interest when the discursive representation of choice and agency is problematic.  For example, limited language skills and less than full knowledge of the new way of life can present barriers to living the ‘appropriate’ model of behaviour, resulting in a struggle to reconcile the ideal and imagined life with how it is actually experienced.  As Torkington (2015.  227) noted in the Algarve, this can lead to identity dilemmas within discourse, such as where an admission of not speaking Portuguese conﬂicted with a stated moral obligation for the British to learn it.  Using a focus on linguistic representations, Torkington identiﬁed a range of both internal (‘I’m too busy’) and external agency repertoires (‘everyone here speaks English’) used to negotiate around these dilemmas.  The concept of agency – a way to identify the ‘capacity by which individuals perceive themselves to be able to act in meaningful ways’ (Miller 2014.  142) – is therefore particularly useful for theorising and analysing the complexities within self-identiﬁcation in lifestyle migration, where it is negotiated in the face of prevailing ideologies about appropriate behaviour.  Going beyond a focus on what respondents say they do, analysis of speaker positioning can explore more dynamic interactional aspects as migrants represent the control they have over their choices and actions.  While members of the online forum make binary representations of the ideal migrant self and the ‘other’, the discourse analysis of interviews demonstrates how negotiation around the prevailing ideologies results in more ﬂuidity.  The aim of this paper, then, is to take a relatively novel approach by pairing local data with that from the wider context, in order to analyse how migrants negotiate inconsistencies where their actions do not align with those of a socially imposed value system.  <Middle> THE CURRENT STUDY.  CONTEXT, DATA AND METHOD.  The research context of the Ariege.  The Ariege is one of 13 departements (administrative divisions) in the recently created Occitanie region of south-west France (it previously lay within the MidiPyrenees region).  It is relatively rural and one of the least populated departments in France.  Despite a continuing loss of local inhabitants to seek employment elsewhere, it is also one of the fastest growing departements, with sufficient incoming migration in recent years to result in an annual net increase of around +1400 (Insee 2009).  It is difficult to obtain precise numbers of Britons residing in France as there has been no requirement for EU citizens to register, whether one resides permanently in France or buys a holiday home there.  However, figures suggest that during the period 2001–2006, more than a third of the 16,600 foreigners to settle in rural areas of the Midi-Pyrenees were British (Touret, Bourniquel and Poisson 2010).  Nevertheless, the estimated number of Britons in the Ariege specifically is relatively low at 30 percent of foreigners, compared with ‘more than 45%’ for the Lot, for example (Touret, Bourniquel and Poisson 2010.  29).  An integrated approach to data analysis.  There has been criticism (Benwell and Stokoe 2006, cited in De Fina 2013.  44) of studies that attempt to link macro and micro contexts without providing an empirical basis for such links.  While the interview data of Benson and others have provided an ethnographic entry point into the lives of British migrants in France and patterns of repertoires, there is potential for circularity of arguments if they emerge from analysis of interviews alone.  As Antaki et al.  (2003) argue, we should be wary of using interview data to not only identify and justify the existence of an ideology, but at the same time explain the discourse in terms of such ideologies.  Deppermann (2013) raised this as a key methodological question within narrative work that aims to relate local positioning acts to more macro structures, reviewing ethnographic approaches as well as those that seek recurrent, broad patterns, or iterativity, across larger samples of data (Georgakopoulou 2013).  De Fina (2013.  54), for example, presented ‘important similarities’ across a repertoire that included local migrant narratives and broadcasts on American radio.  Nevertheless, a detailed integration of data to investigate the relationship between macro and micro positioning, using different data contexts but within the same community, is relatively novel within narrative analysis.  The current study shows how a mixed methods approach can provide a robust foundation to any interpretations of how ideologies are actually constructed and maintained within and beyond a local interview context.  The study developed via two research sub-questions that show how the first – an exploration of how lifestyle migration is mediated and identity represented within an online forum – can give valuable insights to a second question that asks what does local migrant discourse reveal about the expression of identity and agency within a lifestyle migration context.  The digital forum offered naturally occurring data from a discernible and mutually-engaged community, some of whom were approached for interview.  In this way, the data from the online forum for British migrants provided an empirical basis with which to examine local orientations to wider ideologies.  This forum belonged to a website that catered for English-speaking residents in the Ariege, offering information on many topics.  The forum had a number of categories where members could post and ask for advice, offer information or announce that they were moving to the area.  Members needed to be registered in order to post, but the posts themselves could be read by anyone.  The website had an English owner who maintained an active presence as forum moderator.  The site became subject to frequent hacking attacks and it closed in 2011.  After introducing the project on the forum in 2011, I invited members to fill out a questionnaire, which led to twelve interviews.  At the same time, after obtaining permission from the site owners I began a qualitative selection of data.  Threads were selected from a variety of interactions across a range of post types in order to gain a range of perspectives, including the forum’s support mechanisms as well as the type of conflict that sometimes developed.  As the research questions related to identity representation, some threads were selected as they showed positioning strategies that indexed social categorisations of Britons in France.  The total dataset consists of nine topic threads that were posted between 2004 and 2008.  Threads vary from the shortest, consisting of four posts (726 words) by four members, to the longest thread that had 43 contributions (5557 words) by 14 members.  I have preserved anonymity by changing all online names and taking care to remove any identifying material.  The interview extracts within this paper are from one of twelve interviews carried out with forum members during October 2011 in the Ariege.  All respondents were British, heterosexual, owners of their property and only one did not live full time in France.  The interviews were semi-structured in that questions loosely followed the list of issues to be explored, such as probing how participants felt in relation to other migrants, stereotypes of the British, and their use of the forum.  Free association questions were included to introduce concepts without preconceptions.  ‘Do you feel part of a British community in the Ariege. ’ Some questions used the online forum as a lens through which to study identity representation.  for example, asking ‘Have you asked questions on the forum.  Have you answered them. ’ explored how members represented themselves as established or newcomer forum members.  Some questions elicited responses that related to positioning members of the community according to what kinds of questions they ask, such as ‘How much can you tell about someone from what they write on the forum. ’ Of the twelve interviews, five were joint interviews with a couple, including the interview with Emma and Mitch that is featured within this paper.  Joint interviews have potential for disadvantages.  as Arksey (1996) outlines, women are often inhibited when interviewed as a couple compared with an individual interview.  There may also be friction between views, yet this can be an advantage, since disagreement can lead to more depth of understanding of an issue compared with the interviewer-interviewee dyad.  As this paper demonstrates, the variation and disagreement across responses seen within the interview with Emma and Mitch offers a rich resource for exploring the underlying influence of a value system in narrative discourse.  THEMATIC ANALYSIS OF ONLINE DATA.  Digital technology offers many affordances for lifestyle migrants to take advantage of low-density online support networks.  In the Ariege, the digital forum provided a valuable bridge between members who might live anywhere within the departement.  even if members do not physically meet, they act as resources to access information.  As part of the main study, the nine topic threads underwent thematic analysis that identified themes relevant to the research aims, such as positioning of members and their related traits.  Using co-occurrence tools in Atlas-ti, it was possible to highlight relationships such as where identity codes (for example, POSITIVE SELF-IDENTIFICATION.  POSITIONING OF OTHERS AS OUT-GROUP) occurred with those relating to evaluated migrant behaviour (for example, BRITS WHO DON’T INTEGRATE.  NOT SPEAKING FRENCH).  Members who positioned themselves as experienced often oriented to moral obligations as they advised, warned or reproached othermembers to speak French and socialise with the French community.  The next section discusses some of these themes for what they indicated about the forum’s supportive function and the recurrent evaluations about British migration and the ‘right kind’ of behaviour.  The forum.  Support versus dependence.  The practices of the forumillustrate its generally supportive function formembers negotiating a new life in France.  For some, the ability to ask questions in English would undoubtedly have offered an easier way to get a response compared with using offline community networks that were physically closer but likely to be French.  A common practice was for newcomers to ask for specific information or advice, such as where to find a good school, an English-speaking doctor or vet, or where to buy specific items.  There was anticipation that newcomers would be continuously supplied with information.  one member gave thanks for the advice so far and requested ‘please keep any advice coming’.  Another started a new thread with a general request for advice.  ‘Just wanting to introduce myself really and then get LOADS of advice!!!!!’ Although the very act of choosing to take on a new life demonstrates a degree of agency, there is an obligation within these requests for the existing migrants to help to smooth the journey for the newcomers.  Thismay have been interpreted as an undesirable dependency.  One resident advised a newcomer.  ‘Do not be too dependant on British people’, prompting the response.  ‘We are not going to become dependant on anybody’.  The idea of reliancewas not confined to newcomers, although the longer-standing members articulated it more in terms of ‘comfort’.  it was ‘of some comfort, especially in the middle of winter to sometimes hear other English speaking people and have a conversation with them’, and another spoke of being able to buy British foods as ‘comforting to those of [us] here year round’.  The inherent contradiction with the frequent advice given to integrate was acknowledged by one member who conceded ‘that it is easier and more comforting to mix with the rest of the expat residents’, advising newcomers to ‘try to get a balance between the two’.  The interview analysis demonstrates the complexity of working through such a balance within narrative interaction.  The ‘other’ British.  Themes relating to identity and migration ideologies revealed some explicit associations with particular actions, activities and traits.  The likelihood of Britons arriving without speaking French was often assumed, with advice commonly given that newcomers should ‘learn French’ or speak ‘even bad French’.  Some constructed a symbolic boundary against those who did not attempt to speak the local language.  one member referred to compatriots who lived in the same village using vague language – ‘some other Brits’ – to imply avoidance of communication with these undesirable ‘others’.  Some other Brits moved in to our village & were not well received as they spoke “no” French.  They left after 3 months.  Assumptions about not speaking French often co-occurred with references to dependence.  after a discussion on where to buy furniture that referred to the Toulouse branch of Ikea, Chris appeared to take this as reflecting a tendency to use English-speaking businesses (despite Ikea being Swedish).  You lot will never learn.  If they dont speek [don’t speak] English you are all lost sheep in a huge field By describing the British as ‘lost sheep’, he categorises them as a generalised mass entity with an associated trait of helplessness and failing in their duty to learn the local language.  The theme of SOCIALISING WITH THE FRENCH indicated the perceived importance of not isolating oneself.  this same member listed what he ‘put back into’ the French community and invited others to do the same, and ‘leave the UKers behind’.  Others repeated advice to ‘invite your French neighbours around for a drink’.  One member used repeated structures to negate agency, railing at ‘so many’ arrivals who ‘have not done any homework, they do not know how to survive and they do not know anything about the country or language’, reinforcing a lack of capacity to prepare and integrate.  One member even ascribed traits to a named individual, attacking a new member who had been asking a lot of questions on the forum as someone who wants help with everything because his mind set tells him he can’t.  .  .  He has come to a new country for a new adventure, not to be coddled by the people who have come before him.  He must go out and make mistakes like the rest of us and therefore benefit.  These social actions also construct a boundary between the established members and the needy arrivals.  this writer self-positions as among ‘the rest of us’ who came to France for an adventure.  As symbolic boundaries are constructed against the less desirable ‘other’, they reinforce the distinction between one with capacity to act, against one who perceives no such capacity because ‘his mind set tells he can’t’, and who is ‘coddled’ (over-protected) by the experienced migrants.  These ideological positionings and assumptions represent British migration as a system of binary opposites and as they become reified into an ideology, they offer a powerful resource for affirming social identity within a community where experienced residents have the right to admonish newcomers.  As I will now demonstrate, these themes were present in the joint interview, but they generated some resourceful negotiating where what speakers ‘should’ do, and what they actually did, did not always align.  ANALYSING POSITIONING IN INTERACTION.  This paper takes an approach that is closely aligned to a social constructionist approach to discourse analysis, where language is viewed as ‘the prime site of the construction of the person’ (Burr 2003.  53), performing social actions, including representations of identity.  The approach does not view reality as wholly constructed in discourse, but it does align with the Discourse Analysis tradition in its examination of how language helps to represent a version of reality.  There is no assumption that respondents are consciously representing the world in this way, or even that the attitudes expressed reflect coherence in terms of their positions as individuals or groups within the migration context.  Instead, I explore the complex relationship between self-identification and the prevailing ideological beliefs relating to migrant behaviour.  There is no single definition of narrative, although De Fina and Georgakopoulou (2012) draw some basic distinctions between a focus on temporal ordering, on structural properties and on interactional aspects that view narrative as a situated social practice.  This paper takes the latter perspective, seeing narrative as a way of giving meaning to social experience.  From the starting point of a teller’s representation of actions or events, the analysis looks beyond the narrated event – the story – to a wider view of the story world, where the telling event itself is situated within the interactional context of the interview, as well as the wider sociocultural context.  In the interview extracts of this study, the tellers’ characters are aligned to events in time and space as they describe their use of an online forum and their socialising with locals, but a wider view of the story world invites us to look at the way in which the representation is influenced by experiences, reactions and the immediate interactive context.  This might include negotiating and supporting a particular positioning, to provide ‘evidence’ for how the teller wants to be understood.  As the paper will demonstrate, this can include character positioning within a possible world, whereby hypothetical events are brought in to justify actions and support the teller’s positioning.  Such justification and evidence can also involve the use of argumentation strategies.  as Carranza (2015) notes, these are sometimes intertwined with narration as they develop the story world.  This is particularly relevant when supporting a position that could be ambiguous or contested if the narrated events contradict the ideal positions.  In the extracts below, both narration and argumentation intersect in the construction of a wider story world.  Speakers raise claims of truth and normative rightness (Reisigl and Wodak 2009) to justify their actions within the story itself, which is also situated within a wider story world of British lifestyle migration.  The analysis of truth claims looks for where speakers make statements of epistemic knowledge, presenting evidence of fact (what is, what they are) to support a position.  ‘it’s not through lack of choice’.  Analysis of claims to normative rightness project a common understanding relating to moral standards and obligations, often seen in deontic modality.  ‘you should still integrate’.  An initial coding of the expression of attitudes, values and beliefs was made across the interviews.  A value is an importance attributed to something or someone, whereas an attitude is a participant’s expressed way of thinking or feeling about something or someone.  Attitudes and values relating to migration have been seen to contradict each other, such as where Benson’s (2011) participants dismissed the British community in France yet at the same time took comfort from it.  Beliefs reflect more than an expressed attitude, being how our lived experiences and interpretations contribute to what we believe to be true.  a belief may be presented as less questionable than an attitude.  The excerpts analysed within this paper were selected for how these attitudes, values and beliefs were seen to be in conflict when two speakers oriented to them in quite different ways.  Positioning Theory encompasses a range of tools for analysing language as social practice, particularly where local representations may be motivated by prevailing ideologies of the wider context.  The three-level positioning framework developed for identity work in narration by Bamberg and others (Bamberg 1997.  Bamberg and Georgakopoulou 2008.  De Fina 2006) has been selected as it provides an overarching framework for analysing the mechanisms whereby migrants construct identity at three levels of relationship.  1.  between characters within the told world of the narrative.  2.  between speakers within the interactive telling.  and 3.  between speakers/characters and prevailing ideologies as speakers negotiate identity in the face of prevailing ideologies.  Level 1 is the story world of the narrative where I analyse the positioning of characters within reported events by means of two linguistic features.  Membership categorisation, a concept originating within Conversation Analysis, has recently been utilised within narrative positioning analysis as a label to classify the ascription of actions, activities and traits that are ‘core practices of positioning’ (Deppermann 2013.  10) that link to social categories and stereotyping (for example, see Wilkinson and Kitzinger 2003).  Analysis of actions or agentive selves (Schiffrin 1996) examines the linguistic items that convey a perception of ability to act or not act in a meaningful way.  Particular types of actions attributed to characters can reflect both agentive and inagentive aspects.  Agency is not something that we possess in an essentialist way, nor is it only discursive.  that is, having no essence beyond linguistic construction.  The concept of agency lies between these two extremes.  as something expressed within discourse with which we can identify how individuals perceive their (in)ability to act in a way that is meaningful to them in a particular sociocultural context.  The micro-analysis of selected interview excerpts examines the linguistic encoding of (in)agentive positioning by identifying the use of actions attributed to characters, including the speaker as agent of the (in)action, such as ‘we can’t speak the language’.  Another agentive construction is the modal construct of obligation, whereby an action is represented as a social obligation that speakers align themselves with, such as ‘should’ or ‘have to’.  Despite this being represented as an obligation, it can nevertheless be related to agency if it suggests a perceived responsibility relating to one’s (in)capacity to act on an internalised belief (Miller 2014).  At the level of the narrative itself (level 2), the interview extracts are analysed for how the narrative is accomplished interactionally.  This explores the available positionings offered to interactants, both interviewer and interviewee, whether these are taken up, how respondents negotiate difficulties in taking up particular positions, and any foreshadowing or evaluation of the content that frames its interpretation.  Bamberg’s third level of meaning takes a step further by examining the link between local interaction and the construction of identity at a wider, ideological level.  Referred to as the ‘Who am I. ’ question (Bamberg and Georgakopoulou 2008), level 3 positioning concerns a sense of self in terms of how people want to be understood in a particular sociocultural world.  Such representations may be visible in the features described above, as well as in indexicality – or symbolically associated meaning – where language ‘points to’ external social meanings, such as the prevailing ideologies identified in the forum data (the necessity to speak French, socialise with the French community and avoid dependency on the British).  After transcribing the twelve interviews, each was scrutinised to identify examples of the narration of social experience that indexed such beliefs.  ANALYSIS OF INTERVIEW DATA.  The data extracts analysed below are from an interview carried out in 2011 with Emma and Mitch, a couple who moved to the Ariege in 2008 (see the Appendix for transcription symbols).  Mitch was in early retirement, but Emma was in her 40s and the move had been dependent on her continuing to work in a virtual capacity for a British company.  This employment had recently been terminated, and at the time of interview they were facing the possibility of an unwelcome return to the U. K.  They had studied the language at school and also attended French lessons before the move, but it was clearly a limitation for them.  Emma referred to them ‘not speaking or being able to write the language’, having to use Google Translate if they needed to write in French, and that she ‘hadn’t got enough French to hold a conversation’.  They were regular users of the British forum.  Emma and Mitch were well aware of the negative stereotypes of Britons in France, with Mitch using the word ‘ghettoes’ with reference to ethnic clustering to imply that Britons (and other nationalities) were taking over certain areas.  it shouldn’t be in England and it shouldn’t be out here with all the Brits living in (0. 5) the Tarn (. ) Great Britarn The repeated deontic modality of ‘it shouldn’t’ reinforces what he sees as a moral obligation for the British to avoid ethnic isolation, linking back to the warnings of forum members to socialise with their ‘French neighbours’ and avoid dependency on the British.  Unusual among the interviews was Mitch’s detailed construction of a membership category of what he called ‘part-timers’, who were ‘most of the English people we know’ who ‘really want(s) to pretend they’re still English and live in England but stop all the 12 months out here’.  Resentment was rooted in the idea that less committed migrants had it too easy, as they ‘don’t have to suffer the bureaucracy, they don’t have taxes to sort out and all that sort of stuff’.  One specific behavioural trait that he ascribed to these ‘others’ (and claimed to ‘hate’) was of continuing to drive a British registered car, as seen at Carcassonne airport where ‘every other car is a British registration car’.  what are they doing (. ) for a start why have they still got British registrations on the car (. ) obviously means they’ve still got a base in England to get it registered (1) one of the first things we did was put the car on French plates This categorisation was evaluated in strong binary terms.  ‘it’s the wrong way to do it (. ) to me you either live here or you don’t’, and the actions represented as problematic (‘what are they doing .  .  .  why’).  He also contrasted and distinguished his own behaviour (‘one of the first things we did’) from this ‘other’ member category.  This suggests that a motivation for the categorisation was that of positive identity negotiation, as such practical matters of dealing with the French system offered an accessible route of positive identity negotiation for this couple.  Despite being well aware of the monolingual British stereotype and the advice given by forum members, they could not draw upon ‘language’ as a resource with which to claim a positive, integrated migrant identity.  However, constructing a symbolic boundary against the part-timer strengthened the corresponding situational identity of the self and helped to counteract the potential for alignment to the negative stereotype.  The forum as ‘comfort zone’.  Analysis of the forum data showed how resentment had surfaced against the perceived over-dependence of newcomers on the existing members.  Emma and Mitch acknowledged that they used this forum and two others (for the British in France) ‘quite a bit’ and that ‘life would be more difficult without these little sites to go on’.  Emma echoed the forum theme of comfort in familiarity, remarking that ‘it’s nice to know I suppose that there’s somebody out there that’s been through the same situation’ and describing the forum as ‘like a little cushion (. ) like a little comfort zone’.  My next question, designed to probe this sense of ease, led to a response that positioned the couple uncomfortably close to the dependency perceived by some forum members.  The couple negotiate a way around this by justifying their actions within a developed, wider story world, constructing hypothetical events and argumentation strategies.  Agency and dependency.  ‘We won’t have a CLUE’ Excerpt 1a 1 Int.  do you think (. ) would you feel that it was easier to ask a 2 question on the forum than say asking your French neighbour.  3 Emma.  yes (. ) for us yes 4 Mitch.  well I think forgetting the fact that you can’t speak very good 5 French I think anyone who could speak good French would still 6 find it easier to ask the question on the forum Although Emma speaks for them (‘for us yes’), Mitch makes the point that the forum is a mode that is easier (line 6) for anyone to use, not merely due to the English language medium.  He hypothetically aligns them with a high-status category of migrant (with linguistic skills), since it matters little whether one does or does not speak French (lines 4–5).  the forum is the easiest way.  Then Emma raises a contradiction.  Excerpt 1b 7 Emma.  you see I still think word of mouth (0. 5) and I think it builds up 8 [communication 9 Mitch.  [yes I agree but the internet has taken [over so much 10 Emma.  [yes I know but I still 11 think you come to France and you should still integrate and I 12 still think (. ) cause to me the forums are very good but we we’ll 13 be honest Mitch we haven’t gone on the French forums to sell 14 stuff because we can’t speak the language have we so we use the 15 local network purely for that reason (. ) whereas everyone says 16 why don’t you use (. ) can’t even remember what it’s called this 17 other one (. ) and we say yes but if somebody rings in French we 18 won’t have a CLUE what they’re saying 19 Int.  oh there’s a French one.  20 Emma.  apparently there’s one a bit like eBay (. ) something coin (. ) 21 apparently it’s very good but yes you 22 Int.  yes (. ) you’re out of your comfort zone 23 Mitch.  yes you are (. ) you’re selling a dishwasher and a French person 24 phones you up and he wants to know (. ) how many spin speeds 25 has it (. ) what’s the maximum spin speed it’s gone (. ) struggle 26 with that in English (. ) yes but having said that we may have 27 used the English forums to ask questions but we (. ) we’ve never 28 used an English tradesman while we’ve been here have we (0. 5) 29 only Reg who came up and cut the grass before we came (. ) 30 we’ve not used an English tradesman (. ) everything we’ve had 31 has been through French tradesmen This extract shows the difficulty of maintaining a position as people who do things the right way when their lived experiences reflect dependence on the British.  The actual narrated events are sparse – ‘use the local network’ and using ‘French tradesmen’ – and it is the wider context of the story world that supports their positions.  While Emma argues the importance of local interaction as it ‘builds up communication’ (lines 7–8), Mitch continues his pro-forum stance with a claim that the internet has ‘taken over’ (line 9).  Emma’s next utterance, a deontic obligation that ‘you should still integrate’ (lines 10–11), acknowledges a social duty with a claim of rightness that explicitly orients to the wider value system, yet it also undermines their use of the forum.  This contradiction is explained in terms of cause and effect.  they ‘can’t speak the language’ (line 13).  Even a French online site for buying/selling is unfeasible for them, as illustrated by a truth claim applied to a hypothetical situation.  if a French buyer called, they wouldn’t ‘have a CLUE what they’re saying’ (lines 17–18).  Although this opposes Emma’s previous claim of what one ‘should’ do (line 11), the incapacity to act is significant since it indexes a lessening of responsibility.  using the English speaking forum is not the right way, but it is out of their control.  The interviewer is positioned to look no further than the language difficulty.  My recycling of Emma’s reference to a comfort zone (line 22) is an interactional (level 2) positioning of the couple’s behaviour as understandable, and Mitch takes up the point by drawing on the hypothetical washing machine anecdote (lines 23–25).  This not only evidences the logic of Emma’s point about not having a clue (line 18), but it deflects the problem away from the language deficiency.  it is something that would be complex even in one’s native language (‘struggle with that in English’, lines 25–26).  Mitch then shifts across to a broader level 3 positioning that weakens the sense of incapacity conveyed by the negative modality of Emma’s ‘can’t’ and ‘wouldn’t’.  By inserting the truth claim that they have never resorted to using actual English tradespeople (lines 27–31), he orients to the right kind of migrant behaviour, conveying a sense of having some agency in their behaviour.  they do not totally depend (‘never used’) on the English speaking community for services.  Overall, Emma and Mitch show how sensitivity to an issue – the stereotype of dependent Britons – can be achieved by both agentive and inagentive language depending on their perspectives.  Mitch represents their actions as deliberate and logical, whereas Emma orients to a lack of capacity to act.  Her understanding that this is not the right way is evidenced by the modality of what ‘should’ be, showing awareness of the moral obligation.  They demonstrate resourcefulness as they deploy a variety of discursive strategies to lessen any ambiguity in the way that their positions are interpreted.  Representations of agency.  ‘It’s not through lack of choice’.  As previously demonstrated, one theme from the forum data was the perceived importance of socialising with one’s French neighbours.  For this couple, the relationship between agency (choice) and incapacity became even more complex when discussing their socialising activities.  Mitch remarked how ‘we don’t make a point of going to try and mix with the Brits so similarly we don’t mix with the French’.  He described how they are becoming known and ‘accepted’ locally, but that is all.  Excerpt 2a 1 Mitch.  so many of the stallholders know us by now and we stop and 2 have a word on the veggie stall and that (0. 5) so yeah you’re 3 accepted in that respect (. ) we’re not er not standoffish with the 4 people but 5 Emma.  well I think it’s the communication (0. 5) it would be (0. 5) if we 6 could speak fluently (. ) and get by we’d have a whale of a time 7 [wouldn’t you really 8 Mitch.  [yeah if we’d got better French we’d be 9 Emma.  you wouldn’t get further than the front door you’d be ((gestures 10 and makes quick back and forth noise)) 11 Mitch.  yeah I don’t think it would be going out for meals with them and 12 visiting each other’s house type of thing (. ) it would be seeing 13 them in the street and probably for five minutes and have a chat 14 and seeing as you’re walking and people (. ) always want to be 15 friendly (. ) stop and talk to the dog and whatever (. ) ok we miss 16 out to an extent in that respect because the French isn’t good 17 enough (1) but if it was very good we still wouldn’t be going 18 sort of (. ) visiting French people Once again, Emma brings in an alternative perspective in relation to communication.  she argues that if they had fluent French (lines 5–6), they would do things differently.  She voices the alternative in positive terms – ‘a whale of a time’ (line 6) – which is strengthened by gesture that represents busy actions.  Although Mitch does align with this as a possibility, agreeing ‘if we’d got better French’ (line 8), and admitting that they miss out as ‘the French isn’t good enough’ (line 16–17), he once again counters the potential for dependency with an argumentation claim of truth.  this is not what they would actually choose to do.  Even if they did have good French, they ‘wouldn’t’ actively socialise with the locals (line 17–18).  As in the previous excerpt, he makes a hypothetical alignment with more competent migrant speakers of French, this time to position them as having choice in the matter.  they may be poor at French, but this is not the cause of their social isolation.  This is probed by my next question.  Excerpt 2b 19 Int.  mmm so that’s not what you’ve really come for, you haven’t 20 come with a vision of suddenly having loads of French social 21 life and so on.  22 Mitch.  I don’t think we did because we didn’t come to have a a great 23 social life with the Brits either (. ) we left England where we had 24 a very good social life with various motor clubs and we were out 25 most weekends doing things (0. 5) and we just accepted that we 26 were coming and that was going to change (. ) we knew it was 27 going to change and we’re quite happy with that change 28 Emma.  yeah I don’t kno. . w 29 Mitch.  so it’s not through lack of choice that we don’t go and socialise 30 more and go out for meals with people Looking more closely at the actions in lines 22–27, we see how Mitch explains their current position by moving back and forth between the past and the present and integrating a number of truth claims.  He raises a claim that socialising was never anticipated with either the French or ‘with the Brits’, despite describing their former ‘very good social life’ (lines 23–24).  The next part of the utterance uses past tense verbs (shown below in bold) to claim anticipation and acceptance of the future (underlined) situation before the move.  we just accepted that we were coming and that was going to change (. ) we knew it was going to change and we’re quite happy with that change.  While this presents them rather passively as people who just accepted that they would not socialise much in France, it also negates any implication that they were uninformed or unprepared about what the new life would offer them.  The coda portrays them as ‘quite happy’ with this, although the use of ‘quite’ qualifies it somewhat.  Despite Emma’s subsequent disalignment on line 28, Mitch reinforces the idea of agency (‘not through lack of choice’) on line 29, to strengthen the previous claim that even if their French was good, they ‘still wouldn’t be’ visiting French people.  Yet a degree of ambiguity is generated by the contradiction of ‘choice’ with the more passive ‘accepted’.  One possible interpretation is that ‘choice’ related back to the mention of not socialising with the ‘Brits’.  As I have demonstrated, both Mitch and Emma acknowledged the undesirability of British expat clusters, with references to the British in the Dordogne and the Tarn as ‘that’s not what we wanted’.  Although they spoke freely about their ‘very good social life’ back in Britain, this could not be transferred to a British network in France without potential for alignment to the dependent stereotype.  So although the representation of having a ‘choice’ might appear unsupported in the case of socialising with the French, it could relate to a strategic decision to avoid the British.  Positioning at the level of the interaction itself appears to support this.  My own comment on lines 19–21, intended to probe this anticipated lack of socialising, is taken up by Mitch to avoid alignment with British networks and present himself to the interviewer as one who has actively made the ‘choice’.  As with the reference to not using English tradesmen, it affords them a degree of control in the way their behaviour is represented.  Once again, the lack of alignment between Mitch and Emma suggests that one function of the discourse is that of positive self-representation, and as forum users they would have been familiar with the perceived duty to speak French and socialise with one’s neighbours.  Emma’s comment that they would ‘have a whale of a time’ if they were fluent, and her questioning on line 28, undermine his positionings of them as acting through choice.  The initial agreement of ‘yeah’ is cancelled out by the epistemic uncertainty in the drawn out ‘I don’t know’, an opposition to Mitch’s claim that they anticipated an end to their socialising.  As with the previous excerpt, where Emma evaluated their use of the British forum as an unavoidable consequence of poor language skills, it is possible to make a similar interpretation.  For Emma, the claim made by Mitch that they wouldn’t be actively socialising with the French if they could speak their language (lines 17–18) positions them as avoiding more than a superficial integration, and uncomfortably close to the dependent UKers criticised on the forum.  Therefore, while level 3 positioning is not explicit in any orientation to the wider value system in this extract, it seems likely that it was an underlying motivation for how the discourse developed, particularly the different ways in which they resisted alignment.  <Conclusion> CONCLUSION.  This paper has explored the phenomenon of agentive positioning in a British migration context, using two different datasets from the same community.  On a practical level, the paper demonstrates how it is possible to analyse the recycling and maintenance of a value system by evidencing its local and wider manifestations.  When considered in the light of the forum data, the complex positionings made by Emma and Mitch show the difficulties of identity negotiation when accounts of their lived experiences do not align with familiar ideologies espoused within the British community online, such as the need to speak French, mix with the French community and avoid dependency.  The two excerpts notably follow similar patterns.  Emma justifies their behaviour in cause and effect terms, rationalising both their continued use of the British forum and their lack of socialising with the French as a result of poor language skills.  They cannot deny their lack of competence in the French language, but by framing this incapacity as ‘purely’ the reason behind their behaviour, it helps to absolve responsibility for their actions (or lack of them).  While Mitch uses more agentive language and argumentation claims that at times appear contradictory, I would argue that the sense of choice and logic is also a strategic positioning aimed to counteract the potential for alignment with the ‘coddled’ Brits, who ‘do not know anything about the country or language’.  In this way, the paper addresses the call for more studies to present a clear empirical or evidential basis when presenting indexical links between the micro context of the narrator and the wider (macro) social reality (De Fina 2013).  At the same time, the study adds another dimension to the debates around elicited versus spontaneous interaction, and the perceived limitations of research interviews for developing our understanding of social phenomena beyond the interview itself (De Fina and Perrino 2011).  The studies discussed by De Fina and Perrino show how related positionings can be compared across multiple communities, but they nevertheless rarely address contexts beyond interviews.  This paper’s combination of online and interview interaction is a relatively novel approach within sociolinguistic studies, especially as the mode itself – a support network for the British – became an object of discussion during the interview.  On a more theoretical level, the study adds another dimension to the recent focus on narrative positioning.  It is certainly useful to identify positioning that is relatively stable and continuous across contexts (Georgakopoulou 2013), showing how ‘taken for granted structures’ can ‘provide a backdrop’ for displays of identity (Deppermann 2013.  11).  However, we should not assume that agentive positioning will follow anticipated routes or recurrent patterns, even where prevailing ideologies present a system of binary opposites.  Although the present study identified coherence across the themes in the data, the joint interview was valuable in demonstrating the complexities and contradictions among speakers who share a common sociocultural background and experiences but nevertheless represent their actions in contrasting ways.  This also has some bearing on the use of membership categorisation as a tool within positioning analysis, and it supports Deppermann’s (2013) argument that categorisation alone is insufficient to account for the complexities of indexical positioning processes.  For Mitch and Emma, the ‘right kind of migrant’ was a more individually negotiated and interactionally situated construct, as their identity representations did not always fit, unproblematically, into the clearly delineated binary categories of migrant that were constructed by forum members.  One final point relates to the paper’s contribution to the lifestyle migration literature.  The latter has made much of the ambivalence and contradictions inherent within British contexts, and a theme analysis might lead us to interpret such contradictions as incoherence when faced with difficulty in aligning oneself with the default ideal migrant.  However, a focus on language in interaction reveals the truly dynamic nature of agency representations in interaction.  Such inconsistencies and contradictions can be very enlightening towards our understanding of the functions of the discourse (Potter and Wetherell 1987), which in this case includes a positive negotiation of identity as a British migrant in France.  As speakers make strategic, turn-by-turn representations, they do so according to how they see potential for a less negative alignment.  The positioning strategies of this particular couple seem more indicative of a high level of adaptive resourcefulness than a lack of coherence.  Any future studies of stereotyping, ambivalence and inconsistencies in lifestyle migration narratives could bear this in mind.   <Ending>. 