I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Detailed research into the biological foundations of language in the context of growth and maturation – including babbling around six months of age to the production of full meaningful sentences by the age of three years (e. g.  Kuhl, .  Saﬀran, Werker & Werner, ) – has led some to suggest that young children have innate dispositions and incredible abilities to learn any natural language (Lenneberg, ).  Although newborns begin life with the ability to discriminate both native and non-native phonological contrasts attested in the world’s languages (e. g.  Best & Tyler, .  Eimas, Siqueland, Jusczyk & Vigorito, .  Polka & Werker, .  Streeter, .  Werker & Tees,their ability to discriminate non-native consonants and vowels gradually declines between  and  months as a result of consistent exposure to a speciﬁc language (e. g.  Best & McRoberts, .  Best, McRoberts, LaFleur & Silver-Isenstadt, .  Werker & Tees, ), whereas similar ability to discriminate native consonants and vowels are maintained and enhanced over the same time period (Kuhl, Stevens, Hayashi, Deguchi, Kiritani & Iverson, ).  The language-dependent perceptual reorganization during infancy with perceptual narrowing for the native phonological contrasts is considered to be largely attributable to ‘statistical learning’.  tracking the frequencies of the exposed sound tokens and using this information to tune into native phonological categories (Best & McRoberts, .  Kuhl, .  Maye, Werker & Gerken, ).  Such phonological contrasts of diﬀerent spoken languages can be divided into segmental units, including consonants and vowels, and suprasegmental units, such as stresses and tones.  Almost –% of the world’s languages are tone languages (Yip, ), and over half of the world’s people speak a tone language (Fromkin, ).  Many studies on infant tone perception have revealed that the process of perceptual reorganization is shaped by the ambient tonal language.  In one longitudinal case study, the perceptual discrimination of Cantonese tones was found to begin at the tenth month (Tse, ).  In another study by Mattock and Burnham (), infants were tested on their ability to discriminate Thai tone contrasts.  Results indicated that English-exposed infants demonstrated attenuation in tone sensitivity between  and  months, while Chinese-learning infants exhibited a sustained sensitivity to Thai tones over this period.  Moreover, developmental changes in tone perception were systematically explored by Yeung, Chen, and Werker ().  Their results demonstrated that language experience might affect the perception of lexical tones as early as  months.  English-, Cantonese-, and Mandarin-exposed infants each demonstrated different discrimination abilities that accorded with the properties of their native language at this stage.  This study suggests that the formation of tone categories evolves earlier than that for vowels and consonants.  What was previously regarded as a language-general stage of phonological development (from birth to  months) appears not to be so for infants with tone languages as their mother tongue.  Modern Mandarin is a tone language with relatively simple syllable structure (see Figure ).  Each syllable must be attached with one of the four lexical tones distinguishing different meanings (Tone .  high-level tone.  Tone .  mid-rising tone.  Tone .  low-falling-rising tone.  and Tone .  high-falling tone).  Lexical tones and nuclear vowels are compulsory elements for Mandarin syllables, whereas the onsets and the ending consonants are optional (Wang, ).  Hua and Dodd () systematically studied the production of Mandarin among one- to four-year-old children, reporting that children acquired phonological elements in the following order.  tones were acquired first, followed by vowels and syllable-final consonants, which were then followed by syllable-initial consonants.  The phonological saliency hypothesis (Hua & Dodd, ) might account for the order of phonological production in Mandarin, with Mandarin tones being the most salient.  Moreover, in a large-scale population-based production study with children aged two to twelve years (To, Cheung & McLeod, ), results also showed that tone production was early acquired, followed by vowels and then by consonants.  Earlier studies (e. g.  Chao, .  Clumeck, .  Hua, .  Hua & Dodd, .  Li & Tompson, ) have indicated that lexical tones are produced early, with considerable accuracy before age three.  Judgments of tone errors in these studies were typically made by native adult observers in a categorical fashion (correct or incorrect).  However, it is important to note that the aforementioned early production of tones in children before three years of age does not mean that these children have the same abilities of tonal production as do adults.  Innovations in speech analysis tools have afforded greater precision in the evaluation of early tone productions.  A series of studies (Wong, , .  Wong, Schwartz & Jenkins, ) have reported that three- to five-year-old preschoolers have not yet fully mastered the production of Mandarin tones.  None of the Mandarin tones produced by the three- to five-year-old children reached adult-like accuracy, suggesting a protracted course of development extending beyond age five.  Moreover, Yang, Diehl, and Davis () investigated the duration of Mandarin tones produced by five-, eight-, and twelve-year-old monolingual Mandarin-speaking children and young adults.  Although five- and eight-year-olds have already established lexical contrasts of Mandarin tones, adult-like tone production is still developing, with tone duration approximating adult values only in twelve-year-old children.  These findings stood in contrast to earlier studies that claim very early acquisition of stable tone productions (Chao, .  Clumeck, .  Hua, .  Hua & Dodd, .  Li & Tompson, ).  Furthermore, Wong’s studies suggested that tones did not necessarily mature in advance of vowels and consonants in production (Wong, , ).  ForMandarin tone perception, although the study of three-year-old children suggests they already show relatively high perceptual accuracy (around %) of all four Mandarin tones (Wong et al. , ), research on the developmental course of categorical perception (CP) of Mandarin tones is still lacking.  The study of CP is useful because it offers a much more refined perceptual method to track the course of maturation and stabilization in children’s fine-grained perception of Mandarin tones beyond age three.  CP is one of the most extensively studied phenomena in speech perception over the past fifty years.  It is important in cognitive science because it reflects the adaptation of the perceptual system to facilitate categorization among complicated variants that an organism needs to make in its environment (Goldstone & Hendrickson, ).  In the auditory modality of speech perception, CP refers to the fact that listeners rapidly map continuous acoustic signals onto discrete phonological categories, resulting in better discrimination of stimuli across the category boundary than of equivalently separated stimuli within the same category (Liberman, Harris, Hoffman & Griffith, ).  While the great bulk of literature on CP deals with the segmental features (i. e.  consonants and vowels) (e. g.  Fry, Abramson, Eimas & Liberman, .  Harnad, .  Johnson & Ralston, .  Liberman, Harris, Kinney & Lane, .  Miller & Eimas, .  Nenonen, Shestakova, Huotilainen & Näätänen, ), there has been a recent surge of research into whether CP applies to the suprasegmental level, such as lexical tone contrasts in tone languages (e. g.  Bent, Bradlow & Wright, .  Bidelman, Gandour & Krishnan, .  Francis, Ciocca & Ng, .  Gandour, Wong & Hutchins, .  Hallé, Chang & Best, .  Peng, Deutsch, Henthorn, Su & Wang, .  Peng, Zheng, Gong, Yang, Kong & Wang, .  Wang, .  Xu, Gandour & Francis, ).  On the whole, studies on the CP of lexical tones in adults have mainly focused on two aspects.  the influence of language experience (cross-language or cross-dialect), and different domains (music vs.  speech vs.  non-speech).  Specifically, for Mandarin tone perception, there is ample evidence that adult Mandarin listeners not only show a sharp boundary (or a steep transition slope) between the level tone and the rising tone in the identification function, but they also exhibit a prominent discrimination peak around the categorical boundary position, indicating a typical CP of these Mandarin tones (e. g.  Peng et al. , .  Wang, .  Xu et al. , ).  Compared to the extensive research on CP in adults, the progressive development of CP of Mandarin tones from infancy into childhood has received relatively little attention (but see Xi, Jiang, Zhang & Shu, .  Yang & Liu, .  Zhang et al. , ).  In a behavioral study by Xi et al.  (), healthy five- to seven-year-old children and adults were tested on the identification of a tone continuum ranging from Mandarin Tone  to Tone .  Their results showed that six-year-old first-graders have already acquired adult-like identification competence for these Mandarin tones.  However, due to the lack of an explicit discrimination test, their results may not be conclusive.  In another behavioral study (Yang & Liu, ), eight Mandarin monolingual children aged from six to eight years (mean = ·) participated in both tone identification and tone discrimination tasks for tone continua between Tone  and Tone , and between Tone  and Tone .  Mandarin monolingual children showed sharp categorical boundaries in the tone identification task.  However, they did not show prominent discrimination peaks around the observed identification boundaries, implying that the discrimination ability of Mandarin tones in six- to eight-year-old children was not as proficient as it was in adults.  Zhang et al.  () made use of both behavioral and electrophysiological measures to compare ten-year-old Chinese dyslexic children with age-matched healthy controls.  Zhang et al. ’s results demonstrated that the perception of Mandarin high-rising Tone  and falling Tone  was already categorical among the healthy ten-year-old Chinese children.  All in all, the general course of the development of CP of Mandarin tones in young children, who are still developing their ability for Mandarin tone perception, is not yet clear.  Behavioral tests for CP often require overt responses and sustained concentrations, which are relatively difficult for young children.  This may be one of the reasons why behavioral research of CP in children is often limited and inconclusive.  In the current study, a picture-pointing method was adopted to study young children’s responses in both the identification and the discrimination tasks (see ‘Procedure’).  Furthermore, in Mainland China, children normally attend the first grade of primary school at the age of six or seven, where they begin to receive systematic training in phonological coding (i. e.  Pinyin), including tone instruction.  In other words, under normal conditions, six-year-olds in kindergarten have little metalinguistic knowledge of Mandarin tones, while children of the same age who happen to be in the first grade typically do have knowledge of the tone concept.  In the study by Xi et al.  (), six-year-olds in first grade showed a significant enhancement in the tone identification task, which could be potentially attributed to two factors.  physiological maturation at the age of six and/or explicit instruction of Mandarin tone categories in first grade.  However, which of these factors (if either) plays the more important role for the identification improvement has not yet been determined.  To shed light on this issue, in the current study, young children were divided into five groups.  four-, five-, and six-year-olds in kindergarten, and six- and seven-year-olds in first grade.  Additionally, a control group of Mandarin-speaking young adults was recruited.  It is important to investigate the developmental trajectory of Mandarin tone perception in the context of physiological growth and tone education, and, in particular, the earliest time-point at which children typically begin to perceive Mandarin tones categorically in the same way as adults, in both identification and discrimination tasks.  <Middle>Participants.  Seventy-five young children aged four to seven years with Mandarin as their native language were recruited for this study.  However, two from the four-year-old group and one from the five-year-old group failed to meet the criteria on the training trials.  Moreover, two children, one each from the four-year-old group and the seven-year-old group, were reluctant to cooperate during the process of testing and failed to complete the tasks.  All the above-mentioned five child subjects were excluded and are not further shown in the current study.  Additionally, a control group was recruited that consisted of sixteen young adults ( females.  mean age = ·, SD = · years) from the northern part of China.  All participants were free of self-reported neurological diseases, psychiatric disorders, or hearing deficits.  Informed consent (using a form approved by the Behavioral Research Ethics Committee of the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences) was obtained from all parents and children.  The children were recruited from two kindergartens and one primary school, which had students from roughly equivalent family backgrounds in terms of both socioeconomic status and the parents’ education levels.  Of these,  children were in the fouryearold group from kindergarten ( girls),  were in the five-year-old group from kindergarten ( girls), and  were in the six-year-old group from kindergarten ( girls).  Another  children were also in the six-year-old group but from a primary school in first grade ( girls), and  were in the seven-year-old group also in first grade ( girls).  We refer to these five groups as.  four yr, five yr, six yr (K), six yr (P), and seven yr throughout this paper.  The non-verbal intelligence of the children had been assessed by a local administrant hospital before children went to school, using Raven’s Standard Progressive Matrices (Raven, ).  All child participants showed normal non-verbal intelligence.  Moreover, since Gathercole and Baddeley () argued that children with specific language impairments (SLI) have reduced phonological storage in their working memory, every child’s language ability (LA) was screened with the Test of Language Ability in Preschoolers (Ning, ), which consists of five subtests (including grammatical competence, basic vocabulary, and semantic application).  Results indicated all child participants showed normal language development.  The basic information of the tested children is shown in Table .  Materials The syllable /i/ with high-level tone (around  Hz) produced by a female native Mandarin speaker was recorded ( Hz sampling rate, -bit resolution).  This female speaker was chosen because her F range was close to that of the average female voice (Peng, Zhang, Zheng, Minett & Wang, ).  Based on the natural speech template with Tone , all tone stimuli were re-synthesized by applying the pitch-synchronous overlap and add method (Moulines & Laroche, ) implemented in Praat (Boersma & Weenink, ).  Since the pitch pattern (i. e.  fundamental frequency as its acoustic correlate) plays the primary role in tone perception in Mandarin (Kuo, Rosen & Faulkner, ), other acoustic cues which vary greatly in natural speech (e. g.  amplitude, envelope, and duration) were kept constant among stimuli.  The procedures for synthesizing the stimuli followed those described in Peng et al.  ().  Figure  shows a schematic diagram of the pitch contours of the eleven stimuli along the tone continuum (following Peng et al. , .  Wang, ).  The F onsets of the target stimuli were determined by the formula ‘ Hz +  Hz × (Stimulus Number – )’.  In Mandarin, the syllable /i/, when produced with the high-level tone, is a homophone with fifteen different meanings such as ‘clothes’, and is coded as the typical stimulus #.  when /i/ is spoken with the mid-rising tone, it is another homophone with twenty-four different meanings such as ‘aunt’, which is coded as the typical stimulus #.  All the -ms tone stimuli were presented binaurally at  dB sound pressure level.  Procedure To help ensure young children would be able to accomplish the whole identification task and discrimination task (lasting  minutes and  minutes, respectively), the experimental designs were modified to make these tasks more manageable for our child participants, and the two tasks were separately conducted on two successive days.  The identification task was conducted on the first day.  Before the experiment, a training session was provided to ensure that all the children could follow the instructions.  The experimenter taught them to point at the left picture on a computer screen (a car driving on a level road) after playing the stimulus # several times, and to point at the right picture (a car driving on a rising road) after playing the stimulus # several times.  Only after the children succeeded in pointing at the matched picture each time they heard stimulus # or # would they progress to the next step.  There was one practice block (including stimuli #, #, #, #, #, #, #, repeating twice randomly) before the two test blocks to familiarize children with the identification procedure.  An identification accuracy of more than % for the practice stimuli close to the two ends of the continuum (i. e.  #, #, #, #) was required to continue to the test blocks.  The eleven stimuli were randomly presented four times each in each test block.  There were two test blocks for a total of eighty-eight test trials.  The entire practice and test blocks were controlled by E-prime.  The experimenter logged the child’s pointing responses by pressing key ‘’ (for ‘Tone ’) on the keyboard when children pointed at the left picture and key ‘’ (for ‘Tone ’) when children pointed at the right picture (two-alternative forced choice, AFC).  No feedback was given to the participants during the practice and test blocks.  The discrimination task was conducted on the following day.  During the training session, the experimenter instructed them to point at the left picture (a happy face with two identical eyes) representing the same pairs after playing sound pairs (– or –) several times, and to point at the right picture (a sad face with two different eyes) representing the different pairs after playing the sound pairs (– or –) several times.  Only after the children succeeded in pointing at the matched picture each time they heard the training sound pairs (–.  –.  –.  –) would they progress to the experiment.  The practice block contained twelve pairs (–, –, –, –, –, –, repeating twice randomly).  No discrimination accuracy was requested for the practice block.  For the testing part, twenty-nine pairs were presented in a random order, with a  ms inter-stimulus interval (ISI).  Among the twenty-nine pairs, eighteen pairs consisted of two different stimuli (different pairs) separated by two steps (i. e.   Hz), in either forward (–, –, – .  .  .  –, –) or reverse order (–, –, – .  .  .  –, –), and eleven pairs consisted of all the eleven stimuli on the continuum each paired with itself (same pairs).  The above twenty-nine pairs were repeated five times, resulting in  testing pairs in total.  The experimenter pressed ‘v’ (for ‘same’) on the keyboard when children pointed at the smiling picture and pressed ‘n’ (for ‘different’) when children pointed at the sad picture.  The next sound pair would be presented  ms later, after the experimenter pressed the space bar, and children were free to have a rest whenever they wanted.  No feedback was given to the participants during the practice and test blocks.  For the adult participants, the training sessionwas excluded, and thematerials in the practice and test blockswere exactly the same as for the child participants.  The identification and discrimination tasks were conducted within one day.  During the identification task, the adult participants were asked to press key ‘’ on the keyboard when they heard a ‘Tone ’ sound and to press key ‘’ when they heard a ‘Tone ’ sound.  In the discrimination task, they were instructed to judge whether the two stimuli were the same or different, and to respond by pressing a key (‘v’ for ‘same’, and ‘n’ for ‘different’).  Data analyses To investigate the developmental trajectory of the identification and discrimination performance, three key parameters of CP were calculated.  position of category boundary, width of category boundary, and discrimination accuracy.  For each stimulus, the identification score was computed as the average percentage of level (Tone ) or rising tone (Tone ) responses.  Boundary position and boundary width were assessed using Probit analyses (Finney, ).  The boundary position (defined as the % cross-over point) and the boundary width (defined as the linear distance between the th and th percentiles) were analyzed according to the procedures described in Peng et al.  ().  To calculate the discrimination scores, we divided the  discrimination trials into nine comparison units, each consisting of all pairs in four types of pairwise comparisons (AB, BA, AA, and BB) (cf.  Xu et al. , ).  Adjacent comparison units contained the overlapping AA or BB pairs (e. g.  the five – pairs were included in both – and – units).  The discrimination accuracy (P) for each comparison unit was calculated with the formula described in Xu et al.  ().  P = P‘S’/S × P(S) + P‘D’/D × P(D) where the percentages of ‘same’ (‘S’) and ‘different’ (‘D’) responses to all the same (S) and different (D) trials (i. e.  the correct responses) were represented by P (‘S’/S) and P (‘D’/D), respectively.  P(S) and P(D) were the probabilities of S (AA or BB) and D (AB or BA) trials in each unit, which were both equal to · (Peng et al. , ).  In addition, we calculated the discrimination accuracy of between-category comparisons (Pbc) and within-category comparisons (Pwc) for each subject based on the position of category boundary as follows (cf.  Jiang, Hamm, Lim, Kirk & Yang, ).  If the identiﬁcation results indicated that one participant’s categorical boundary was at position ·, then the average discrimination scores corresponding to the comparison units – and – which straddled the boundary would be coded as the discrimination accuracy for between-category comparisons, while the within-category discrimination accuracy for that subject was obtained from the mean of the discrimination scores for the remaining seven comparison units.  R E S U L T S. 