A central assumption of most models of reading acquisition is that children start out by decoding words on a letter-by-letter basis at ﬁrst (Ehri, 1995.  Grainger & Ziegler, 2011.  Seymour, 2005.  Share, 1995).  They learn grapheme–phoneme correspondence (GPC) mappings and sound out words.  As their reading skills develop and they gain more experience with written words, it is assumed that they become sensitive to intermediate-sized units until they are ﬁnally able to decode whole words directly “on sight. ” For example, Seymour’s (2005) dual-foundation model proposes that reading develops in phases.  It is thought to begin with simple alphabetic decoding using phonemes and advances to increasingly more complex structures, ﬁrst centered around rimes, and in the last stage using syllables and morphemes.  Equally, the multiple-route model of orthographic processing (Grainger & Ziegler, 2011) assumes that beginning readers start out by decoding words on a phonology-driven letter-by-letter basis (cf.  Share, 1995) that leads them to two routes of orthographic processing.  a ﬁne-grained and a coarse-grained route.  The main difference between the ﬁne-grained and coarse-grained routes is the coding of letter positions.  the ﬁne-grained route is sensitive to ordered letter sequences, whereas letter coding in the coarse-grained route is position invariant.  As a consequence, the coarse-grained route entails direct access from orthography to semantics via whole words, whereas the ﬁne-grained route is tuned to detect frequently co-occurring letter sequences as functional units for word recognition.  Both syllables and morphemes feature frequently co-occurring letter sequences and can thus be suspected to function as sensible intermediate-sized units that are detected in the ﬁne-grained route.  Albeit being formally very similar in terms of size and features of letter position coding, syllables and morphemes differ from each other in how they are deﬁned and what type of information they encode.  Syllables are phonologically deﬁned and encode information about pronunciation.  Morphemes are deﬁned through the convergence of form and meaning, encoding lexical–semantic information.  Syllables can thus be seen as being more closely associated with a phonological processing route, while morphemes constitute a more direct link between orthography and semantics.  A very recent extension of the multiple-route model by H¨aiki¨o, Bertram, and Hy¨on¨a (2016) captures this relation by proposing a syllabic assembly mechanism as an intermediate stage between a phonological and a ﬁne-grained route, thus predicting the use of syllables to chronologically precede the use of morphemes in reading development.  In a range of languages, empirical evidence has been put forward separately for the use of syllables and morphemes in reading development.  Vast evidence shows that sensitivity to syllables, as a subdomain of phonological awareness, is a strong predictor for later reading ability (e. g. , Wagner & Torgesen, 1987), measured, for example, by syllable counting or syllable segmentation tasks.  In the process of reading, sensitivity to syllables has also been found early in children of different languages.  For example, French Grade 5 readers show effects of syllable frequency (Chetail & Mathey, 2008) and syllable compatibility effects, that is, faster responses when a word was preceded by the corresponding syllable, have been found in syllable detection tasks with Grade 1, 3 and 5 children (Col´e, Magnan, & Grainger, 1999.  Ma¨ıonchi-Pino, Magnan, & ´Ecalle, 2010) and in lexical decision tasks with sixth graders (Chetail & Mathey, 2012).  The visual segmentation of a word in a position congruent with a syllable boundary (pa/per vs.  p/aper) results in fewer word recognition errors for poor second-grade readers of English (Katz & Baldasare, 1983) and syllable-congruent coloring similarly speeds up poor second-grade readers of French, while it slows down good agematched peers (Chetail & Mathey, 2009).  Moreover, eye-tracking studies indicate that hyphenation at syllable boundaries is less disruptive than hyphenation within syllables for Finnish readers already by the end of ﬁrst grade (H¨aiki¨o, Hy¨on¨a, & Bertram, 2015).  This indicates that syllables are helpful units very early in reading acquisition and for dysﬂuent readers (see also Hautala, Aro, Eklund, Lerkkanen, & Lyytinen, 2012) and that in many languages syllables come into play very early in the course of reading acquisition.  There is also vast evidence that children use morphemes in word recognition.  In lexical decision and naming tasks in a variety of languages, elementary school children have been found to respond faster and more accurately to multimorphemic compared to matched monomorphemic words (Italian.  Marcolini, Traﬁcante, Zocolotti, & Burani, 2011.  French.  Col´e, Bouton, Leuwers, Casalis, & Sprenger-Charolles, 2011.  Qu´emart, Casalis, & Duncan, 2012.  English.  Carlisle & Stone, 2003, 2005).  Conversely, more false alarms and prolonged response times (RTs) in lexical decision were found in the presence of real morphemes in pseudowords, because they were mistaken as real words and thus harder to reject (Qu´emart et al. , 2012).  Those effects of morphology were found as early as in Grade 2 for French children, and a little later (around Grade 3) in Italian children.  Moreover, masked morphological priming effects for sufﬁxed words and nonwords have been reported for children in different languages from around Grade 3 onward (English.  Beyersmann, Castles, & Coltheart, 2012.  French.  Beyersmann, Grainger, Casalis, & Ziegler, 2015.  Casalis, Dusautoir, Col´e, & Ducrot, 2009.  Qu´emart, Casalis, & Col´e, 2011).  A Finnish eye-tracking study by H¨aiki¨o, Bertram, and Hy¨on¨a (2011) reports advantages from hyphenations in compounds only for slow second-grade readers, but not for their faster age-matched peers or Grades 4 and 6 readers.  Therefore, as for syllables, there is general consensus that children use morphemes as units at some point in reading development.  however, ﬁndings on when this happens diverge depending on the language studied.  It is important to note that only a few studies have more directly compared syllables and morphemes in reading (see Prinzmetal, Hoffman, & Vest, 1991, for a study with adults using an illusory conjunction paradigm).  However, in order to reﬁne models of reading acquisition, it is necessary to disentangle the relative importance of syllables and morphemes in word recognition and determine whether there is an order of their utilization in reading development.  One study that has addressed the direct comparison between syllables and morphemes in child reading was undertaken by Col´e et al.  (2011) with French second and third graders.  They used multimorphemic words in which the syllable and morpheme boundary do not coincide (e. g. , malade).  This is the case for multimorphemic words that have a sufﬁx beginning with a vowel.  The consonants at the end of the stem in these cases form a syllable unit with the sufﬁx, because syllable division follows the maximal onset principle (Spencer, 1996), which states that the maximally possible number of consonants should be assigned to the onset of a syllable rather than to the end of the preceding syllable.  Col´e et al. 