1.  FOREWORD.  Aiming at analyzing the effects of the internationalization of universities, a joint research team from Universidad Autonoma de Madrid (UAM) and Hong Kong University (HKU) studied the socialization process experienced by a group of Chinese and Spanish students enrolled in mobility programs.  Since exchange students must show ﬂuency in both relational and academic discourses (which includes the ability to move through institutional and social spaces with ease.  Blommaert 2013), we tried to identify which practices international students deploy in order to enter the alien environment.  To do so, we traced a group of exchange undergraduates and analyzed their interactional practices at institutional and non-institutional spaces.  The socialization networks in which students take part are suitable sites for analyzing the negotiation of ideologies and subjectivities, and for exploring the relationship between stancetaking and recent forms of cosmopolitanism.  This is why, in this paper, we address such networks in our analysis of a communicative event situated on the fringe of a focus group (a research technique) and an informal gathering (naturally situated interaction).  Over a dinner party organized to inaugurate the research project in Madrid, the participants (two local researchers, five Chinese students and two local students, one originally from Taiwan) share meanings, recall semiotic resources to interpret the meaning of elements of sociocultural life, jointly construct intersubjectivities and negotiate their social identities within interaction (Jaworski and Thurlow 2009).  However, shared enactments of stance require complex strategies that go beyond the customary understanding of stance negotiation (cf.  Jaffe 2009 for an overview of sociolinguistic research on stance).  In this respect, our paper aims at making two contributions.  On the one hand, within sociolinguistic theory, it explores the extent to which sociocultural and ideological factors underlie stance alignment and the collective construction of identities (intersubjectivity being the link between both threads).  On the other hand, concerning cosmopolitanism, we advance a more nuanced approach to the notion based on positioning.  Cosmopolitanism remains an elusive concept, both in its definition and in its various kinds.  The subjects in our study position themselves as cosmopolitans, but not in ways that distinctly reflect an ‘ability to stand outside of having one’s life written and scripted by any one community’ (Vertovec and Cohen 2002.  4).  Rather, their cosmopolitanism points to a globalization of tastes resulting from increasingly multicultural societies and widespread capitalism (Calhoun 2002).  However, in spite of sharing a cosmopolitan orientation, significant ideological contradictions emerged during the interaction, and negotiation was required to overcome the misalignments.  The analysis of these tensions shows the extent to which all the elements involved in the stancetaking process (evaluation, positioning, and the definition and framing of the object of stance) are shaped by social values and ideologies.  In order to present our contributions, the paper is organized as follows.  After this introduction, the theoretical frame is presented in section 2.  The communicative event is described in section 3.  Section 4 analyzes two case studies (one on bullfighting, another on shopping trips to European capitals) excerpted from the transcription of the video-recorded event (see the Appendix for transcription conventions).  A rounding-up discussion of cosmopolitanism is presented in section 5, and the main conclusions are summarized in section 6.  2.  DIALOGICAL POSITIONING.  FROM SITUATEDNESS TO IDEOLOGIES We follow a fine-grained discourse analytic approach (drawing from the fields of the ethnography of communication, the micro-ethnography of social interaction and sociolinguistic ethnography) that highlights the role of local complexities in interactional activities.  Often, supposedly stable social processes are projected onto discourse as background facts (Blommaert and Bulcaen 2000.  Rampton 2001).  Such an aprioristic approach conceals how participants, in particular situations, enact language patterns in unexpected, creative and heterodox ways (Gumperz 1982.  Roberts, Davies and Jupp 1992.  Rampton 2001).  At the same time, we think that ideologies and social processes (such as cosmopolitanism, the internationalization of universities or consumption patterns in global societies) should be part of the analysis, since interactions shape and are shaped by other social practices and processes across space and time (Heller 2006, 2011.  Rampton 2006).  Stancetaking implies an evaluative, affective and cognitive act to which participants react.  For this reason, our study of dialogical positioning addresses the interplay between intersubjectivity and interactional stances.  However, our study of stance is not restricted to the situated interactional level, but moves onto the ideological domain of constructed values.  During the collaborative process of successive stance realignments upon which the construction of intersubjectivities rests, the sociocultural values and beliefs deployed by the participants have a most significant impact.  As presented by Du Bois (2007), the stance alignment process rests upon a coincident evaluation and positioning with regard to a given object (Figure 1), and both the mediating framework of linguistic structures and the values invoked by participants are crucial factors.  To our mind, however, the successive reframing of the object itself is also crucial, since it allows the emergence of new stances upon which alignment can happen. 