INTRODUCTION.  SITUATING THE STUDY This article examines the nexus of non-normative gender/sexual and national identities within Singapore’s contemporary LGBTQ movement.  Drawing upon Puar’s concept of ‘homonormative nationalism’ or ‘homonationalism’ (Puar 2007), I view it speciﬁcally as a form of discourse, and extend it, particularly, as a discursive strategy employed by a queer subaltern constituency in ‘doing’ a politics of pragmatic resistance in an illiberal city-state.  My focus is the Pink Dot movement in Singapore (or ‘Pink Dot SG’, a name which aligns sexual/ gender non-normativity with the nation), launched in 2009, which organises a large-scale, free-to-all public rally, themed ‘Freedom to Love’.  This is held annually in Hong Lim Park, the only public space in Singapore which allows the gathering of a mass assembly without an ofﬁcial license.  In this article, I explore the ‘impossible presence’ (Chan 2012) of a visibly optic queer event in a city-state that continues to criminalise gay sex and maintains a resolutely heteronormative public sphere.  My point of focus is on the promotional online videos produced annually, which have been pivotal to the success of the Pink Dot movement (Philips 2013).  A close multimodal analysis of one of the videos, titled ‘For Family.  For Friends.  For Love’, is analysed in order to explicate the discourse of homonationalism at work.  The analysis is situated within the dual perspectives of critical discourse studies (CDS) and ‘southern theory’ or, as I shall term it, ‘southern praxis’.  While it is assumed that sociolinguists are familiar with CDS, and so it requires less explanation, a southern praxis perspective will be outlined in greater detail.  CDS, motivated by goals of social justice and emancipation, is a perspective interested in the discursive dimensions of social issues that sustain asymmetrical power relations, which privilege certain groups in a society whilst disadvantaging and marginalising others.  the latter of which entails closure of life possibilities for disenfranchised subjects.  The term ‘critical’ is understood, broadly, to encompass the complex dynamics of power relations at work in any situation, in any given sociopolitical-historical moment.  While CDS has an established tradition of investigating various forms of hegemonic power structures, research on resistance as discursively articulated by historically marginalised groups remains largely underdeveloped.  The potential exists, nonetheless.  note, for example, Wodak and Meyer’s statement.  ‘CDA [or CDS] researchers are interested in the way discourse (re) produces social domination, that is the power abuse of one group over others, and how dominated groups may discursively resist such abuse’ (Wodak and Meyer 2009.  9, emphasis mine).  CDS, therefore, has the capacity to engage more fully with various aspects and interrelations of power, from the points of view of institutional structures as well as of marginalised individuals and communities that engage dominant structures in agentive ways (see also Lazar 2014).  In this study, power relations are viewed both in terms of state and heteronormative hegemonies, and especially, in terms of discursive resistance exercised by a marginalised LGBTQ community.  ‘Southern theory’ (e. g.  Comaroff and Comaroff 2012.  Connell 2007) or ‘southern praxis’, as I call it, refers to a mode of intervention that seeks to unsettle the hegemony of Northern-centricity in governing the geopolitics of knowledge globally, in favour of interconnected and multiple sites from which theory and practice get constituted.  From a critical perspective, I argue that this is not solely about the development of intellectual projects, but has important implications for political organising and lived experiences as well.  The imbrication of theory and practice/action, as praxis, is absolutely essential for a critical enterprise.  Aligned with Mohanty (2003), I use the ‘North’/‘South’ terminology to generally ‘distinguish between afﬂuent, privileged nations and communities and economically and politically marginalised nations and communities’ (2003.  226).  While these terms loosely distinguish the northern and southern hemispheres, afﬂuence and marginality of course do not line up within this geographical frame in any stable way.  As the Comaroffs (2012.  7) put it, there are enclaves of ‘the south in the north and the north in the south’.  The terminology, therefore, is necessarily imprecise, slippery and porous, and for this reason, I ﬁnd Mohanty’s formulation of ‘nations and communities’ extremely useful.  Having said this, the North/South terminology serves a political, explanatory function that draws attention to the experiences of colonisation, historically as well as discursively, and the structured imbalances of power and inﬂuence across geoscapes.  The notion of the ‘South’ or periphery, moreover, importantly functions as an analytical category to denote a politicised positionality in regard to theory and practice.  The periphery as an ‘ex-centric location’ (Bhabha 1994) has been conceptualised as offering an ‘angle of vision’ or a ‘special vantage point’, arising from an acute awareness of borders and boundaries, which are exclusionary and enabling in providing pathways to navigate between the borders (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012.  hooks 1984.  Mohanty 2003).  What might constitute a southern praxis.  Here, I outline three points pertinent to the present study.  Firstly, a southern praxis involves de-centring Northern-centric prerogatives in theorising which, arising from an inadequate recognition of their own socio-historical specificities, are presented as universally agenda-setting.  As a form of discursive colonisation, a Northerncentric lens, through which the rest of the world is read, profoundly excludes the experiences and social thought of the periphery, views the South merely as a source of ‘unprocessed data’ in need of Northern theoretical illumination, and ‘others’ the South as exotically different or playing catch-up with the North as the normative point of reference (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012.  Connell 2007.  Mohanty 2003.  Spivak 2000).  For example, in sexuality research, a Northern-centric ‘rights’ discourse has been assumed to be universally applicable, and globalisation is seen as the unilineal spread of Northern models of homosexuality (Altman 1997.  Warner 1993).  In assuming a global gay identity, Altman (1997.  417), for instance, argues for the ‘emergence of a Western style politicised homosexuality in Asia’ and places Asian gays in a place of deferred arrival in a normatively woven Northern narrative of gay liberation.  Secondly, decolonisation of knowledge goes beyond demystifying Northern privilege to contributing positively towards a globally inclusive theory-making and practice.  Resisting erasure and ‘othering’ of the South means viewing the South as legitimate producers of theory in their own right about the social world they inhabit, and re-writing ideas of Northern experts from their situated insights (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012.  Connell 2007).  The Comaroffs (2012) rightly advocate a move from ‘grand theory’ towards ‘grounded theory’, the latter of which involves a historically contextualised knowledge production based on a lived praxis.  Fundamentally, then, a southern praxis eschews ‘monopolies of truth’ (Das 1995), such that all knowledge production, regardless from the North or the South, must necessarily be self-reflexive and acknowledge its social, economic, political, historical, and geographical groundedness.  Thirdly, a southern praxis adopts the view of theory and practice as a transnationally shared process achieved through dialogue and mutual learning.  As Connell notes (2007), engagement, critique, respect and recognition form the bases of mutual learning, whereby the North too must learn as actively as the South.  Mutual learning can be in the form of developing an interconnected set of intellectual projects that emerge from varied social starting points as well as forging transnational alliances for political organising (Connell 2007.  Mohanty 2003).  A critical southern praxis strives to move from a politics of identity towards building a transnational politics of solidarity.  Writing about homosexuality in Brazil, Parker (1999.  231) outlines a politics of solidarity as that which is ‘capable of hearing not only our own pain and suffering, but also the pain and suffering of others, subject to the multiple forms of oppression, exploitation, and injustice that have been produced by the contemporary world system’.  This is needed for political organising in both the North and the South.  To be sure, CDS and a southern praxis are consonant perspectives.  Both are modes of critical intervention into hegemonic discourses of power and privilege, and are aligned with excluded, marginalised communities.  Both also believe that knowledge production is not an apolitical activity, but is invested in relations of power and ideology.  However, while CDS with its welldeveloped linguistic and semiotic frameworks offers a sharp analytical instrument for discursive critique of knowledge practices of various kinds, CDS scholarship itself, built upon and propagating Northern hegemonic epistemologies, can also learn from a southern praxis.  The critical analysis of the Pink Dot video, from a southern/CDS perspective, builds upon two sets of conceptual ideas, which shall be explained below.  The first is ‘pragmatism’, through which the sociopolitical contexts of Singapore and Singapore’s LGBTQ movement can be historically understood.  Resistance in pragmatic terms, or ‘pragmatic resistance’ (Yue 2012), is introduced, against which the emergence of the Pink Dot movement and its tactical approach are set out.  The second set of ideas is ‘homonormativity’ (Duggan 2003) and ‘homonationalism’ (Puar 2007), and how these are differently, and strategically, implicated in the Pink Dot SG movement.  In the light of these conceptual discussions, the critical analysis of the Pink Dot video in terms of the discourse of homonationalism as a politics of pragmatic resistance is then undertaken.  In concluding, I return to some observations about ‘doing’ queer politics from a southern praxis perspective.  <Middle> THE POLITICS OF PRAGMATIC NECESSITY.  The concept of pragmatism is central to understanding the production of the LGBTQ culture and activism in Singapore, both from the point of view of state governance and in terms of a tactical response formulated by a marginalised queer constituency.  As a mode of governance, the ideology of pragmatism was developed as an ‘instrumental rationality’ (Chua 1995.  59) by the ruling PAP government (the People’s Action Party) for postcolonial nation-building since the 1960s.  Based on a survivalist ethos, it justified overt government intervention in all areas of social life, rationalised as ‘natural’, ‘necessary’ and ‘realistic’ solutions to challenges of nation-building (Chua 1995).  Underlying state pragmatism was a clear economic imperative.  Economic growth was seen as the best guarantor of social and political stability necessary for national survival, and material improvements were regarded as the most tangible index of ‘taking care of the collective good’ (Chua 1995).  In practice, the policies rationalised on pragmatic grounds often proved to be undemocratic and unapologetically anti-liberal.  Also, rather than ‘in principle’, the exercise of pragmatism has been ‘contextual’ and ‘ad hoc’, which could suddenly alter the trajectory of previously established policies by the introduction of radically newer ones, and could prove inconsistent and contradictory to existing policies.  The PAP government, however, while maintaining the formal features of a democratic electoral politics, has promised that in the final analysis its policies would lead to the establishment of a stable communitarian democracy.  Hence, pragmatism as an operative logic has achieved popular legitimacy among Singaporeans, and is constitutive of the ideological consensus between the government and the people.  Referring to the contradictions as ambivalences between non-liberalism and neoliberalism, and rationalism and irrationalism, Yue (2012.  1) describes the PAP’s practice as an ‘illiberal pragmatism’, which is central to understanding the governance of homosexuality and the production of an LGBTQ culture in Singapore.  For example, even though gay sex is criminalised through the maintenance of Section 377A (‘Outrage of Decency’) of the penal code, same-sex cohabitationispermitted througha recent change inproperty law, arising froman over-supply of public housing, which makes it possible for same-sex couples to copurchase government-subsidised flats.  Thus, although a hegemonic discourse of heteronormative home ownership continues to prevail, the new government policy has unwittingly made possible non-heteronormative domesticity. 