The English spelling system is notoriously difﬁcult to master, because as well as having regular relationships between sounds and spelling (e. g. , the sound [z] is written as z, as in zoo or quiz), it also has numerous inconsistent and irregular relationships (e. g. , [z] can also be written as s or x, as in bees or xylophone).  However, the apparent “chaos” of English spelling is less extensive if larger scale patterns are considered (Kessler & Treiman, 2003).  For example, some spellings can be conditioned by their position in a word, and/or by their adjacent letters (e. g. , word-initial [kh] is usually written c before a, o, and u, but k before e and i).  In other cases, a word’s morphological structure can inﬂuence its spelling.  For example, a word’s inﬂectional ending can determine the spelling of its last few letters, regardless of its pronunciation.  This can lead to different spellings for the endings for words such as purest (a superlative) and purist (a person), but the same spellings for the endings for words such as laughed and smiled (both regular past-tense verbs), or laughs and smiles (both plural nouns, or third-person singularAs discussed in more detail below, major theoretical and empirical accounts of spelling development suggest that writers learn quite early that plural nouns and third-person singular verbs should be spelled with a ﬁnal –s in English.  However, there is growing evidence that these simple rules may not be used at all by many children, and even not by some adults (Bourassa, Beaupre, & MacGregor, 2011.  Kemp & Bryant, 2003).  In direct contrast to conventional assumptions, many children and even adults may rely instead on individual, word-speciﬁc spellings to get these endings right.  Further, whether or not these morphological rules are used may vary with the level of education attained in adulthood (Mitchell, Kemp, & Bryant, 2011).  For people who do apply these spelling rules, it is not known when their application begins or how it progresses.  The aim of this study was thus to examine, for the ﬁrst time, both overall performance and individual differences in the application of two seemingly simple morphological spelling rules, by participants in primary school, secondary school, and adulthood.  CONVENTIONAL ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE ACQUISITION OF INFLECTIONAL ENDINGS.  Conventional stage-based models of English spelling development hold that children learn to spell simple inﬂectional endings such as –s, –ed, –er, and –ing by about the age of 9 to 10 years (Ehri, 1986, 1992, 1997.  Frith, 1985.  Gentry, 1982.  Gentry & Gillet, 1993.  Henderson & Templeton, 1986).  There is some evidence that children’s initial spelling of inﬂectional endings improves quite quickly, and is usually correct by the end of primary school, in studies of both naturalistic spelling (e. g. , Green, McCutchen, Schwiebert, Quinlan, Eva-Wood, & Juelis, 2003.  Varnhagen, McCallum, & Burstow, 1997) and spelling to dictation (Leong, 2009.  Walker & Hauerwas, 2006).  For example, the regular plural ending –s appears to be acquired reasonably well in the ﬁrst 2 years of writing experience (e. g. , Read, 1986.  Treiman, 1993), although third-person singular –s appears to take longer to get right (Leong, 2009.  Turnbull, Deacon, & Kay-Raining Bird, 2011).  However, a closer look at these and other data reveals that the acquisition of inﬂectional endings is not as rapid or complete as these conventional stage-based spelling models would claim.  For example, the ﬁrst graders in Treiman’s (1993) and Turnbull et al. ’s (2011) studies occasionally used –z for plurals ending in the sound [z].  Green et al.  (2003) found that even though overall mean rates of correctness were 86%–92%, only 61% to 76% of their individual third- and fourth-grade participants spelled plural noun inﬂections correctly, and Sterling (1983) observed phonetic spellings of inﬂectional endings in children as old as 12 years.  Many of the correct spellings in the studies reviewed above might come from children’s store of rote-learned orthographic forms.  It is therefore important also to test the spelling of novel words, whose orthographic representation cannot be retrieved from memory.  For example, Beers and Beers (1992) asked children in school Grades 1 to 6 to spell inﬂected pseudowords such as guds, and found that the correct use of the plural inﬂection –s was very similar across grade levels, but not at ceiling (approximately 80%).  Further, in previous studies, children may simply have been using a particular spelling for a certain sound pattern, regardless of its morphological status.  The only way to rule out this possibility is to compare children’s spelling of both uninﬂected and inﬂected words.  In a large longitudinal study that made this comparison for another inﬂection, the regular past-tense –ed, Nunes, Bryant, and Bindman (1997a) found that children learned to spell this ending only very gradually, between the ages of 6 to 10 years.  They moved from sound-based spelling (e. g. , kist for kissed), to applying –ed indiscriminately to verbs and nonverbs (e. g. , kissed but also sofed for soft), then just to verbs (whether regular or irregular, e. g. , sleped for slept), and ﬁnally only to regular verbs.  In a second study, this gradual pattern of acquisition was also shown to occur in the spelling of pseudowords (Nunes, Bryant, & Bindman, 1997b), where stored word knowledge could not be used.  These ﬁndings suggest that without directly contrasting uninﬂected and inﬂected word forms, the ability to spell inﬂected endings correctly can be easily overestimated.  LEARNING TO SPELL THE INFLECTIONAL ENDING –s.  The –s endings of regular plural nouns and third-person singular verbs constitute two of the simplest spelling rules in English (especially when applied to onesyllable words, as in most of the research).  To reiterate, regular plural (inﬂected) nouns may be pronounced with a ﬁnal [s] (as in bricks) or [z] (as in bees), or with [ɪz] (as in boxes).  However, they are always written with a ﬁnal –s.  Similarly, present-tense verbs inﬂected in the third person, such as picks, sees, and ﬁxes, are always written with a ﬁnal –s.  In contrast, uninﬂected words pronounced with a ﬁnal [s] or [z] are virtually never spelled with a ﬁnal –s.  Instead, these singular nouns or uninﬂected verbs are generally written with –x (if their ﬁnal [s] is preceded by the sound [k], as in box or ﬁx), or with –ze, –zz, or –se (as in breeze or seize).  (There are some uninﬂected words spelled with a ﬁnal –s, but these are mostly multisyllabic words of Greek or Latin origin such as mathematics and diabetes, plus some low-frequency monosyllabic exceptions such as lens. ) The correct spelling of the word endings discussed so far could always be achieved on the basis of their meaning or their morphological status, as all have had a sound structure that could plausibly be either inﬂected or uninﬂected.  However, there are some English words whose sound structure (and thus whose spelling) means that they can occur only in inﬂected form.  Speciﬁcally, words in which a ﬁnal [z] is preceded by a voiced consonant (such as [d], [g], [n]) are virtually all inﬂected, and therefore spelled with a ﬁnal –s (as in leads, begs, and swans).  Thus, it is very common to see penultimate voiced consonants written together with –s, but very uncommon to see them written with other representations of [s] such as –z, –ze, and –se.  In other words, combinations such as –gze and -bz simply look wrong.  There is now robust evidence that humans can, and do, learn all kinds of patterns from their environment without direct instruction, including the spellings for certain sounds (e. g. , Thompson, Fletcher-Flinn, & Cottrell, 1999), but also quite complex statistical patterns of letter co-occurrence (e. g. , Hayes, Treiman, & Kessler, 2006.  Pollo, Treiman, & Kessler, 2009.  Treiman & Kessler, 2006).  Thus, such words could conceivably be spelled correctly with a ﬁnal –s on the basis of people’s sensitivity to the frequency with which letters co-occur, without a thought to morphological status.  Several studies support the conclusion that the accurate spelling of some morphological endings could be achieved via sensitivity to letter co-occurrence rather than to morphology.  Kemp and Bryant (2003) assessed the use of the plural rule in children (school years 2 to 4, aged 6 to 9) and adults by asking them to spell one-syllable pseudowords ending in [z].  They found that participants were much more likely to use the ending –s correctly for pseudowords presented as plurals when the ﬁnal [z] was preceded by a voiced consonant (e. g. , writing stogs in There are some baby [stɒgz] in the pond.  74% correct for children, 91% for adults) than when it was preceded by a long vowel (e. g. , writing grues in There are some baby [gruz] in the pond.  37% correct for children, 50% for adults).  These ﬁndings were extended by Bourassa et al.  (2011), who found that children in Grade 4 (aged 9–10 years) used inﬂectional –s correctly for the ﬁnal [z] of pseudowords presented as inﬂected nouns and verbs (e. g. , writing scrays in Al [skrez] the ﬁsh in the afternoon) more often than they incorrectly used –s for pseudowords presented as uninﬂected (e. g. , writing scraze in Joe and Sue will [skrez] the bike).  However, their performance was still very low (all means between 21% and 37%).  It appears that child and adult spellers do not consistently use the morphology-based plural rule when confronted with new words, and instead may rely on statistical patterns of letter co-occurrence.  EDUCATIONAL LEVEL DIFFERENCES.  One unexpected ﬁnding from Kemp and Bryant’s (2003) was that the adult participants who had been to university performed signiﬁcantly better than adults who had not.  It is not unsurprising that those who go on to tertiary education might have higher literacy skills than those who pursue other types of employment.  However, given the apparent simplicity of the plural spelling rule, and the widespread assumptions about its early acquisition, it was unexpected that performance would differ with education level.  This issue was explored by Mitchell et al.  (2011), who gave participants inﬂected and uninﬂected nouns and verbs, with two different end sounds ([ks] and [z]), and used a spelling choice task rather than a dictation task, which allowed more pseudowords to be tested in a shorter time.  They, too, found clear differences in the responses of young adults who were university students, and those who had not attended university, but were instead involved in (semi)skilled training.  As well as calculating overall mean scores, the authors assessed individual performance, by considering which participants performed above chance in selecting the morphologically appropriate spelling for the pseudowords.  The difference was striking.  more than 80% of university students consistently chose the appropriate spelling, whereas less than 8% of nonuniversity students did so.  It is difﬁcult to compare these ﬁndings to those of previous studies, as there is a dearth of research on spelling and morphological knowledge in adults who are not reading disabled, but who are also not at university.  Numerous researchers have investigated various aspects of spelling (e. g. , Coleman, Gregg, McLain, & Bellair, 2009.  Greenberg, Ehri, & Perin, 2002.  Kemp, Parrila, & Kirby, 2009) and morphological processing (e. g. , Leikin & Hagit, 2006.  Raveh & Schiff, 2008) in adults with poor literacy skills, whether because of limited educational opportunity or dyslexia.  However, much of the extant research on typical adults’ spelling (e. g. , Burt, Salzgeber, & Carroll, 2013.  Holmes & Malone, 2004) and morphological processing (e. g. , Rueckl & Aicher, 2008.  S´anchez-Guti´errez & Rastle, 2013) has come from samples of university students.  This means that many conclusions about adult spelling knowledge could well represent overestimations, as they are based on the performance of a subgroup of adults who are likely to have higher literacy skills, on average, than the general population.  We do not know how well such conclusions apply to adults who do not go on to tertiary education, but who would not identify as having literacy difﬁculties.  More than half of adults in the United Kingdom do not have a tertiary education (UK Government, 2014).  It is therefore essential to test the spelling and morphological knowledge of this majority group, not just from those at university, if we are to draw conclusions that are relevant to a wider range of adults.  THE PRESENT STUDIES.  The aim of the studies presented here was to assess knowledge of the rules about spelling plural noun and third-person singular verb –s in children at primary school, secondary school, and in a group of young adults who had not been to university.  This is the ﬁrst research to use a spelling choice test of the ability to apply both noun and verb endings, across such a range of ages, including adults not at university.  Further, the few previous studies to assess the use of inﬂectional –s have presented the stimuli in a single form only (e. g. , How many [priz] can you see. ), whether as a dictation task (Bourassa et al. , 2011.  Kemp & Bryant, 2003) or a spelling choice task (Mitchell et al. , 2011).  It is possible that rather than having an imperfect grasp of the relevant morphological rules, the participants simply did not pay sufﬁcient attention to the sentence context to make use of its morphological cues in their responses.  In the present studies, we instead included two forms of each pseudoword (inﬂected and uninﬂected, in counterbalanced order), and asked participants to choose the spelling of the second form.  For example, participants might hear Last week I saw a [pri], and today I heard two [priz] singing, and then choose the appropriate spelling of [priz] as prees or preeze.  (In this case, prees is correct, as the sentence makes clear it is a plural. ) Providing two forms of the target pseudoword might help to focus attention on its morphological form, and thus give participants a greater chance of applying their morphological knowledge.  In each of our three studies, we examined overall mean scores, to assess overall spelling knowledge of these patterns and to provide a comparison with previous research.  However, our main aim was to assess the tendency of individual participants to perform above chance at choosing the correct type of spelling.  We predicted that in each age group tested, there would be a group of participants who knew and used the rules under study, and a group who did not.  In general, those who know the rule should perform consistently above chance on the pseudowords whose spelling they are asked to choose.  Those who do not know the rule should perform around chance level.  <Middle> EXPERIMENT 1.  PRIMARY SCHOOL CHILDREN.  In this ﬁrst experiment, we looked at the ability to choose the morphologically appropriate spelling for pseudowords presented as inﬂected and uninﬂected verbs and nouns, in children in British school years 4 to 6 (aged 8–11 years).  According to the conventional models of spelling development and experimental ﬁndings discussed earlier, most children at this stage of their schooling should have learned to go beyond sound-based spelling, and should be making use of the morphological structure of words in their spelling.  However, none of our participants had received any formal instruction in morphology or morphology-based spelling patterns.  Such instruction was not part of the United Kingdom’s National Curriculum at the time of testing, and the teachers of the classes involved conﬁrmed that they had not taught the children anything about morphology.  Their responses were in line with the ﬁndings of research conducted with British teachers around the same time, which revealed that the vast majority had no explicit knowledge of morphology themselves (Hurry, Curno, Parker, & Pretzlik, 2006.  Hurry et al. , 2005). Participants.  Participants were 317 British children (162 boys, 155 girls) in school years 4 to 6, at four government-funded primary schools in a middle-class area of Southeast England.  The children had a mean age of 9. 8 years, and a range of 8. 0 to 11. 9 years.  Fifty-ﬁve of these children (17%) spoke an additional language to English.  Materials.  GENERAL SPELLING.  General spelling ability was measured by asking children to spell to dictation the ﬁrst 15 words of the spelling subtest of the Wide Range Achievement Test—Third Version (WRAT-3.  Wilkinson, 1993), which increase in difﬁculty.  Time constraints precluded the presentation of up to all 40 words until children made 6 errors in a row, as is standard for this subtest, and thus we used raw, rather than standardized, scores in our analyses.  REAL-WORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE.  A set of 20 real words was presented to test participants’ ability to choose the correct one of two potential spellings, both with the same pronunciation.  This is an ability required to succeed on the main task of pseudoword orthographic choice.  These one-syllable real words ended in [ks] or [z], and each child was presented with either 10 [ks] or 10 [z] real words, to match the end sound of the pseudowords with which they were later presented, as described below.  Each real word appeared twice in a sentence.  once in inﬂected form (as a plural noun, e. g. , boxes, or a third-person singular verb, e. g. , sacks), and once in uninﬂected form (as a singular noun, e. g. , box, or ﬁrst-person singular verb, e. g. , sack).  Each form could occur ﬁrst or second in the sentence.  These sentences were read aloud by the researcher (e. g. , We need some large boxes.  Have you got a spare box.  or Here is another sack.  Can you carry two sacks. ).  For each target form, participants saw two possible spellings, one correct (e. g. , box), and the other with the same pronunciation but a morphologically incorrect ending (e. g. , bocks).  These real words, and the other pseudowords, are shown in Appendix A.  VC[Z] ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE.  A set of 10 pseudoword pairs ending in a vowel + voiced consonant + [z] sound (referred to as VC[z] pseudowords) was developed.  These pseudowords were presented in spoken sentence contexts.  They were presented ﬁrst in uninﬂected and then in inﬂected form, half as nouns (e. g. , In my garage I have one [plin], but in the shed there are three more [plinz]) and half as verbs (e. g. , We [krʌn] after school, but Mary [krʌnz] in her lunch break).  As described in more detail further below, for each pseudoword, participants chose which they considered to be the more suitable spelling (e. g. , pleenze or pleens for [plinz].  cruns or crunze for [krʌnz]).  As noted above, verbs and nouns with this VC[z] pattern are nearly always inﬂected and require a ﬁnal –s spelling.  To avoid children becoming biased to choose –s every time, these pseudowords were added to the main pseudoword orthographic choice task described below, in which the correct choice varied.  MAIN PSEUDOWORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE TASK.  Finally, a set of 120 one-syllable pseudoword pairs (based on Mitchell et al. , 2011, shown in Appendix A) was used to test participants’ ability to choose the appropriate spelling on the basis of morphology alone.  Half of the pseudowords ended in [ks] and half in [z], and each was placed in a different sentence context that indicated whether the pseudoword was intended as a noun or a verb.  Thus, there were 30 pseudowords of each category (end sound and word type).  The pseudowords had an overall mean number of 14. 4 (SD = 10. 8) phonological neighbors (real words that differed from the pseudowords by a single phoneme), and these neighbors had a summed word frequency of 409. 5 (SD = 926. 9.  Rastle, Harrington, & Coltheart, 2002).  As above, each pseudoword appeared twice per sentence.  It appeared once in uninﬂected form, for which the appropriate ending was always –x (e. g. , snox) or –ze (e. g. , preeze).  It also appeared once in inﬂected form, for which the appropriate ending was always –s (e. g. , snocks and prees).  Order was counterbalanced so each pseudoword was presented half the time as a noun and half as a verb, and half the time the target spelling was inﬂected, and half the time uninﬂected.  Each time, the choice was between two possible spellings of the second, target, pseudoword in each sentence (e. g. , snocks/snox or prees/preeze).  Procedure.  Participants were tested in 12 class groups of 25 to 30, in three classes at each year level (4, 5, and 6) at each of the four schools.  Children completed the 15-word general spelling test to dictation.  It proved too onerous for these young children to each make spelling decisions about all 120 pseudoword pairs, and so each child was administered just 30 pairs, consisting of 30 [ks] nouns, or 30 [ks] verbs, or 30 [z] nouns, or 30 [z] verbs (counterbalanced across schools and year groups).  The presentation order of the 30 pseudoword pairs, combined with the 10 real-word pairs and the 10 VC[z] pseudoword pairs, was randomized to generate four separate 50-item sequences.  The experimenter explained, “We are going to do some work with made-up words.  We call these made-up words ‘pseudowords’ because they do not have any meaning in the English language.  For each pseudoword you will hear two sentences.  The sentences will contain different forms of the same pseudoword.  Your task is to choose the most suitable spelling for the second form of the pseudoword by ticking the box next to your choice from the two words that you have printed in front of you. ” The experimenter asked the participants if they had any questions, and then for each task, read each sentence, including the two forms of the target (pseudo)word for participants to choose the most suitable spelling for the second form.  Even though having prerecorded stimuli would have ensured the identical delivery of each pseudoword, it was much more familiar for the children, and more engaging, to hear spelling words pronounced by an adult.  Watching the experimenter read the stimuli also provided visual, as well as auditory, information about the pseudowords.  The placement (upper or lower) of the correct form of each target on the response sheet was counterbalanced.  An example item is given below.  (Heard) “My sister [glɒksɪz] in the sunshine.  I [glɒks] in the rain” (Seen) Choose spelling.  glox (cid. 2) glocks (cid. 2) Results and discussion.  Group means.  To gain an overall view of children’s performance, we ﬁrst considered the group means for the test of general spelling, and for the orthographic choice tests of the real words and the VC[z] pseudowords, shown in Table 1.  Overall scores on the real-word orthographic choice task were high, which suggests that as a group, participants grasped the task requirement of selecting the correct one of two spellings for a single heard word.  When presented with a choice of spellings for the VC[z] pseudowords, children performed quite well overall, which suggests that they, like children in previous studies, were sensitive to the fact that [z] after a voiced consonant is virtually always spelled –s.  The 55 children who knew an additional language to English did not differ signiﬁcantly from the rest on any of these initial tasks (all ps > . 05).  Their data were therefore retained for all further analyses.  Mean performance on the main pseudoword orthographic choice task is shown in Table 2.  The interitem reliability of the scales was moderate to good, with Cronbach α calculated as 0. 71 for the [ks] nouns, 0. 65 for the [ks] verbs, 0. 69 for the [z] nouns, and 0. 73 for the [z] verbs.  As shown in the table, participants chose the morphologically appropriate spelling only about two-thirds of the time in most cases, with little consistent increase across age groups, and some small variations between word types.  Individual performance.  Our main aim, however, was to go beyond group means to consider individual performance.  We had predicted that some children would use the relevant morphological rules and perform consistently above chance, whereas others would not.  In a two-option choice task with 30 trials, chance performance is 15, and on the binomial, a score of 21 or more is signiﬁcantly above chance (as 21 is signiﬁcantly more than 15 at p = . 04).  Thus, it was highly likely that children who scored ࣙ21 out of 30 on their pseudoword category ([ks] nouns, [ks] verbs, [z] nouns, or [z] verbs) had used a morphological rule to guide their spelling choice for that category.  Table 3 presents the percentage and number of participants of each age group who performed signiﬁcantly above chance for each category.  We also checked for potential sex differences, but saw very little difference between the percentage of boys (38. 3%) and girls (36. 8%) who performed signiﬁcantly above chance.  As shown in Table 3, the children who performed signiﬁcantly above chance on their pseudoword category were in the minority, for each age group, ranging from 26% of the 8-year-olds up to 38% of the 10-year-olds.  Their mean scores out of 30, for the [ks] nouns and verbs, and the [z] nouns and verbs, were 24. 9, 24. 0, 23. 7, and 25. 4, respectively.  These signiﬁcantly above-chance scores suggest that these participants were using the morphological rule under study.  The remainder (the majority of children) had scores that were around chance level, ranging from 73% of the 8-year-olds to 62% of the 10-year-olds.  Their mean scores out of 30 for the pseudoword groups listed above were 17. 4, 16. 7, 16. 1, and 15. 9, respectively.  The performance of these children leads us to conclude that they were not using the morphological rule at all, or that they were using it too sporadically to reach consistently above-chance performance.  We considered which factors may have contributed to children performing at or above chance on this task.  We ﬁrst ruled out the possibility that their orthographic choices were strongly related to the phonological characteristics of individual pseudowords.  neither the number of each pseudoword’s phonological neighbors nor the summed frequency of those neighbors was signiﬁcantly related to the likelihood that the most appropriate pseudoword spelling would be chosen.  Nor was the likelihood of appropriate spelling choice signiﬁcantly related to the order in which a pseudoword was presented.  This suggests that overall, participants did not learn to, or realize how to, choose the correct spelling during the course of the task, which is perhaps unsurprising given the lack of feedback during the task.  A binary logistic regression was conducted to assess which, if any, of the main factors of interest contributed to achieving above-chance or chance performance.  general spelling ability (as measured by the WRAT-3), sex, or age group, or the two manipulated pseudoword factors, word type (noun or verb) and word ending ([ks] or [z]).  This generalized linear mixed models analysis revealed that a signiﬁcant contribution was made to pseudoword orthographic choice by spelling ability (p = . 004), word type (p = . 016), and word ending (p = . 035), but not by sex or age group (nor any interactions).  Speciﬁcally, children improved slightly but signiﬁcantly with each extra word spelled correctly on the general spelling task (odds ratio [OR] = 1. 02), and were slightly but signiﬁcantly more likely to perform better on pseudowords presented as nouns than as verbs (OR = 1. 08) and on pseudowords ending in [ks] than in [z] (OR = 1. 07).  Overall, these ﬁndings suggest that by the age of 10 years, most children have not yet fully grasped the seemingly simple English rules concerning the spellings of nouns and present-tense verb inﬂections.  Their uneven performance across word types (nouns and verbs) and end sounds ([ks] and [z]) suggests that participants were relying on patterns of letter co-occurrence, and not (just) morphology to make their spelling decisions.  These ﬁndings support those of Kemp and Bryant (2003) and Bourassa et al.  (2011), but are at odds with the predictions of conventional spelling models, which suggest that simple inﬂectional endings should be largely mastered by this stage.  Previous research has shown an improvement in spelling pseudowords’ inﬂectional endings from the primary school years to adulthood (Kemp & Bryant, 2003).  In the present study, the likelihood of above-chance performance did not improve signiﬁcantly with age, but it did improve with general spelling ability.  This was unexpected, as age and spelling ability are correlated.  In this sample, however, the variation in spelling skill with age must have been sufﬁciently large that the relationship with above-chance performance held only with spelling ability.  In our second experiment, we asked secondary school students, who were both older and more experienced with spelling, to complete the same tasks.  EXPERIMENT 2.  SECONDARY SCHOOL CHILDREN.  Conventional models of spelling development, as well as empirical data, suggest that knowledge of morphology-based spelling patterns, like knowledge of other aspects of written language, develops with age and with exposure to written text.  In this second experiment, we investigated the performance of secondary school students in school years 7 to 9 (aged 11–14 years) on the orthographic choice task of the spellings of inﬂected and uninﬂected endings of pseudoword nouns and verbs.  Like the children in Experiment 1, they had received no explicit instruction in morphology or morphology-based spelling patterns. Participants.  Participants were 190 British children (98 boys, 92 girls) in school years 7 to 9, with a mean age of 12. 9 years, and a range of 11. 4 to 14. 7 years.  Because there were relatively few 11-year-olds (n = 23) and 14-year-olds (n = 18), we grouped participants into two more even age groups.  11 to 12 years (n = 97) and 13 to 14 years (n = 93).  These children attended a school drawn from a moderate to high socioeconomic status population with relatively high academic expectations, in the same area as the primary schools visited for Experiment 1.  Forty-two (22%) of these children spoke an additional language to English.  Materials.  GENERAL SPELLING.  General spelling ability was measured by asking children to spell to dictation the ﬁrst 25 words of the WRAT-3 (Wilkinson, 1995), which increase in difﬁculty.  Again, time constraints on testing prevented the test being administered in its standardized form (until six consecutive errors had been made), and so we used raw scores in our analyses.  REAL-WORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE.  As a test of participants’ ability to choose the correct one of two potential spellings for a heard word, the 20 monosyllabic real nouns and verbs from Experiment 1 were presented to each child.  10 ending in [ks] and ending in [z], in the same sentence contexts as before.  Because of time constraints on testing, VC[z] pseudowords (e. g. , ploons) were not administered.  MAIN PSEUDOWORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE TASK.  The set of 120 pseudoword pairs and sentences from Experiment 1 was used in this study.  Procedure.  Participants were tested at their school, with two classes from each school year tested together, in groups of 60–65.  They completed the 25-word general spelling test to dictation.  Because these older children were capable of completing more items than those in the previous experiment, each child was asked to select the correct spelling for 60 of the 120 pseudoword pairs.  Each participant was presented with 30 [ks] nouns and 30 [z] nouns, or with 30 [ks] verbs and 30 [z] verbs (counterbalanced across school years).  Again, the [z] and [ks] pseudoword pairs were randomized, together with the 20 real-word pairs, to generate four separate 80-item sequences.  Children were asked to tick the box that they thought corresponded to the more suitable spelling of the second form of the target, with instructions as in Experiment 1.  Results and discussion.  Group means.  Children’s scores for the test of general spelling, and of their spelling of the experimental real words, are shown in Table 4.  As half the children were presented with orthographic choices about nouns, and half about verbs, the means for these two groups are also shown.  The children performed very well on the real-word orthographic choice task, which suggests that they understood the task requirements.  The 42 children who had an additional language to English did not differ signiﬁcantly from their peers on either of these tasks (ps > . 05).  Thus, we retained all participants’ data in the subsequent analyses.  The children’s mean performance on the [z] and [ks] pseudoword nouns and verbs was then considered.  The interitem reliability of the scales was moderate to good for three of the scales, with Cronbach α calculated as 0. 76 for the [ks] nouns, 0. 80 for the [ks] verbs, and 0. 74 for the [z] nouns, but weaker, 0. 52, for the [z] verbs.  The mean performance on these pseudowords is presented in Table 5, where it is seen that overall, these children selected the morphologically appropriate spelling for about two-thirds of the pseudowords, regardless of age group or word type.  It thus appears that these secondary school students had a better idea of these morphological rules than primary school students (cf.  Experiment 1.  see Bourassa et al. , 2011.  Kemp & Bryant, 2003), but their overall mean performance was still quite low.  Individual performance.  Our main aim was to consider individual performance.  The number of participants who had performed above chance (at least 21 out of 30) on each of the pseudoword categories was calculated, as shown in Table 6.  For each pseudoword type, we identiﬁed a group who had performed signiﬁcantly above chance.  In most cases, the above-chance group constituted the minority of the sample, and the overall percentage of children who performed above chance was around 36% for the younger group and 54% for the older group.  There were no obvious sex differences, with similar percentages of male (45. 4%) and female (43. 5%) participants performing above chance.  The mean numbers of appropriate choices for the [ks] nouns and verbs, and the [z] nouns and verbs, were 24. 7, 25. 0, 24. 4, and 24. 8, respectively, for these above-chance performers.  The remainder of the children performed at around chance level.  Their mean appropriate choices for the pseudoword types listed above were 16. 8, 15. 7, 16. 5, and 16. 8, respectively.  We suggest that the former group were applying the morphological rules, and that the latter group were not, or only very occasionally.  As in Experiment 1, an initial check conﬁrmed that participants’ tendency to choose the most suitable pseudoword spelling was not signiﬁcant to the phonological characteristics of the pseudowords (number of phonological neighbors or summed word frequency of those neighbors), nor to the order in which the pseudowords were presented.  A binary logistic regression was conducted to assess whether achieving above-chance or chance performance was signiﬁcantly determined by general spelling ability, sex, age group, pseudoword type (noun or verb), or ending ([ks] or [z]).  This generalized linear mixed models analysis showed that a signiﬁcant contribution was made by spelling ability (p < . 001), word type (p = . 031), and word ending (p = . 012), but not by sex or age group (nor any interactions), even though spelling generally improves with age.  Specifically, children improved signiﬁcantly with each extra word spelled correctly on the general spelling task (OR = 1. 35), and were nearly twice as likely to perform above chance on pseudowords presented as nouns than as verbs (OR = 1. 75) and on pseudowords ending in [ks] than in [z] (OR = 1. 89).  As in Experiment 1, these variations across pseudoword types and ending sounds suggest that participants were not simply applying morphological rules when making spelling choices.  Although the mean scores were similar to those of Experiment 1, the percentage of individuals who could correctly choose the appropriate ending for inﬂected and uninﬂected nouns and verbs appeared higher in secondary school than in primary school.  We would assume that this improvement comes about as a result of increased exposure to, and experience with, written and spoken language.  However, it should also be borne in mind that these children attended a school with relatively high academic standards, and might have shown better performance than would be seen in other schools.  Nevertheless, we would expect to see further improvement in an adult sample.  This was the focus of our ﬁnal experiment.  EXPERIMENT 3.  ADULTS.  In this third experiment, we presented the same set of pseudowords to an adult sample.  Previous evidence suggests that the ability to correctly spell these kinds of pseudoword is nearly ubiquitous in undergraduates but substantially rarer in those without a university degree (Kemp & Bryant, 2003.  Mitchell et al. , 2011).  However, there are no data on whether there are differences between adults who have not attended university, but who have completed different levels of preuniversity education, and we tested these groups here.  Outside a university context (where students often receive course credit for research participation), it can be difﬁcult to recruit groups of adult participants in spelling studies, especially when a pool of community volunteers does not exist.  We were able to secure the participation of a large group of new recruits to the British Armed Services.  These young adults were currently at the compulsory basic training stage, during which there is no differentiation of ofﬁcers from other ranks.  In general, these recruits represent a wide cross-section of society and education, from young school-leavers, to those already highly skilled in particular ﬁelds (e. g. , electrical or mechanical engineers), and those who would later achieve ofﬁcer rank.  Although this group had more males than females, in most other aspects it appeared more representative of the general population than most university-based psycholinguistic samples.  Such samples are very often made up of ﬁrst-year psychology students, who tend to be unrepresentative of the general population not only in their usual sex ratio (usually female dominated) but also, more important, in that they are also likely to have much higher academic and literacy skills than their nonuniversity peers.  Thus, we felt that at least some generalizations could be made from Experiment 3’s participants to the general population. Participants.  Participants were 95 young adults (84 male, 11 female) with a mean age of 21. 5 years, and a range of 17 to 32 years.  All had recently joined the British Armed Services as new recruits and were beginning training in a variety of skilled and semiskilled occupations.  The participants had completed school up until at least the age of 16 years.  all had completed their General Certiﬁcate of Secondary Education (GCSE, completed during the ages of 14–16 years), and 22 had also taken A-level exams (General Certiﬁcate of Education Advanced Level, taken during the ages of 16–18 years), but none had attended university.  English was the ﬁrst language for all but 3 participants in the sample.  Materials.  GENERAL SPELLING ABILITY.  General spelling ability was measured by administering, to dictation, all 40 words of the WRAT-3, with raw scores reportedREAL-WORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE.  Participants were asked to choose the correct spellings of the 20 real words presented in Experiment 2.  VC[Z] ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE.  Participants were presented with the 16 monosyllabic VC[z] pseudowords (e. g. , truds, inﬂected –s spelling always correct) used in Experiment 1.  MAIN PSEUDOWORD ORTHOGRAPHIC CHOICE TASK.  The same 120 pseudowords, in the same sentence contexts, were presented as in Experiments 1Procedure.  Participants were tested in a classroom, in groups of 14 to 30, as described for Experiments 1 and 2.  These adult participants were each given all pseudoword 120 pairs.  30 each of [ks] nouns, [ks] verbs, [z] nouns, and [z] verbs.  The combination of sentences and pseudowords was systematically varied to control for any word-level effects.  The sequence of presentation of the 20 realword pairs, 16 VC[z] pseudoword pairs, and 120 [z] and [ks] pseudoword pairs was randomized to generate four separate 156-item sequences.  Results and discussion.  The mean numbers of correct spellings on the general spelling test, of correctly selected spellings of real words and of VC[z] pseudowords, for participants of the two education levels, are shown in Table 7.  Participants did relatively well, although certainly not at ceiling, at choosing the appropriate spelling for the real words, which suggests that they understood the task requirements.  On the VC[z] pseudowords, however, performance was quite low, suggesting that participants made limited use of the cues provided by words with this pattern.  The participants’ performance on the four categories of experimental pseudowords was then considered.  The reliability of the scale for the categories was moderate to good, with Cronbach α calculated at 0. 71 for [ks] nouns, 0. 60 for [ks] verbs, 0. 72 for [z] nouns, and 0. 68 for [ks] verbs.  The participants’ mean scores on the [z] and [ks] pseudowords are shown in Table 8.  Overall, participants chose the appropriate spelling for these pseudowords a little less than two-thirds of the time, with minor variations across education level and pseudoword category.  It appears that the understanding and use of apparently simple morphological rules is not perfect by adulthood, at least in this sample.  Individual differences.  We then calculated the number and percentage of participants who performed signiﬁcantly above chance (21 or more out of 30) on the four categories of [ks] nouns, [ks] verbs, [z] nouns, and [z] verbs.  These signiﬁcantly above-chance performers are shown in Table 9.  Even in this adult sample, overall, only a minority of participants chose appropriate spellings at a rate higher than would be expected by chance.  about 37% overall.  On the [ks] nouns and verbs, and the [z] nouns and verbs, these adults showed mean scores out of 30 of 24. 4, 24. 0, 24. 4, and 24. 6, respectively.  The remainder of the sample chose spellings at around chance level, which suggests that they were not consistently following morphological rules.  Their mean scores across pseudoword types were 16. 7, 16. 5, 15. 7, and 15. 5, respectively.  In contrast to the child samples, a greater percentage of women (36. 4%) performed above chance than men (28. 3%).  However, this difference seems to be driven by the smaller group with A-levels (men 41. 6%, women 56. 3%), rather than the larger group with GCSEs (men 24. 6%, womenAs in the previous two experiments, there was no signiﬁcant relationship between performance on the pseudoword orthographic choice task and the phonological features of the pseudowords (number of phonological neighbors or neighbors’ summed word frequency), nor of the order in which a pseudoword occurred in the test.  A binary logistic regression was conducted to assess whether general spelling ability, education level, sex, pseudoword type (noun or verb), or ending sound ([ks] or [z]) helped to determine whether a participant would show above-chance or chance performance.  This generalized linear mixed models analysis showed that spelling ability (p < . 001), education level (p = . 044), and word ending (p = . 007) all made a signiﬁcant contribution to performance on the pseudoword orthographic choice task, but sex and word type did not (nor any interactions).  Speciﬁcally, participants improved signiﬁcantly with each extra word spelled correctly on the general spelling task (OR = 1. 14), were more likely to perform better if they had completed A-levels than GCSEs (OR = 1. 71) and were nearly twice as likely to perform better on pseudowords ending in [ks] than in [z] (OR = 1. 93).  Thus, although adults did not differ in their performance on nouns and verbs, the difference in ending sound suggests that participants were using word-level, nonmorphological cues, in addition to any use of more reliable sentence-level morphological cues.  The results also conﬁrm previous ﬁndings of differences in applying simple morphological rules in adults with different levels of education (Kemp & Bryant, 2003.  Mitchell et al. , 2011), but suggest a differentiation even between those who have completed different levels of schooling preuniversity.  Comparison across experiments.  We would have liked to present the same 120 stimuli to all participants across the three experiments.  However, as mentioned earlier, this proved too difﬁcult for the younger participants, and so our compromise was to present the full set of items in a fully or partially between-subjects design for the two school-age groups.  This meant that we could not fully compare performance across the three experiments.  However, we were able to make basic comparisons by conducting a chi-squared analysis on the proportion of participants who performed above chance overall on the main pseudoword orthographic choice tasks, across the three experiments.  34. 4% of primary students, 44. 7% of secondary students, and 37. 3% of adults, as shown in Tables 3, 6, and 9.  It conﬁrmed that the differences across the three groups did not reach signiﬁcance, χ2 (2) = 5. 47, p = . 07.  <Conclusion> GENERAL DISCUSSION.  We examined the ability of primary school children, secondary school children, and adults of two different education levels to choose spellings for pseudowords presented as inﬂected and uninﬂected nouns and verbs.  The rules about using –s for the inﬂected forms, and other spellings for the uninﬂected forms, are among the simplest in the English orthography.  The sentence contexts highlighted the morphology of the target pseudowords by presenting them in both inﬂected and uninﬂected forms.  However, we found that across the age groups tested, participants chose the morphologically appropriate spelling only about two-thirds of the time.  This ﬁnding is important in that it goes against the claims made in conventional models of spelling development (e. 