In language development, bilinguals often lag behind monolinguals of the same age.  Bilingual children are not delayed in all aspects of language development relative to monolingual children, but primarily those aspects linked to frequency of exposure in a particular language, such as vocabulary (see review in Nicoladis, ).  Bilingual children often score below the monolingual norm or below same-age monolinguals on vocabulary tests in at least one of their languages (Bialystok, Craik & Luk, .  Bialystok, Luk, Peets & Yang, .  Bialystok, Majumder & Martin, .  Junker & Stockman, .  Nicoladis, .  Oller, Pearson & CoboLewis, .  Uchikoshi, .  Umbel & Oller, .  Umbel, Pearson, Fernández & Oller, .  Verhallen & Schoonen, ).  Bilingual children and adults also show greater difficulty in lexical access (i. e.  they take longer or make mistakes when accessing specific words in the lexicon for production) than monolinguals (Gollan & Acenas, .  Gollan, Montoya, Cera & Sandoval, .  Yan & Nicoladis, ).  Importantly, limited vocabulary may lead to limitations on bilinguals’ communicative and conceptual skills (Keith & Nicoladis, .  Zareva, ).  The primary purpose of the present study was to investigate bilingual children’s strategies in choosing words in the context of a narrative task to document the strength of any relationship between linguistic (vocabulary) deficits, if they are found, and communicative and conceptual skills.  As we will detail below, many previous studies on lexical access have relied on experimental tasks, such as picture-naming or picture-based choice tests.  However, there is a discussion in the literature that these standard measures should be interpreted carefully because they are extremely impacted by different cultures and linguistic input (de Villiers, ).  Unlike these experimental tasks, in narrative tasks there is no necessary correct word.  Narratives rely heavily on imagery (Mallan, ) and are more cognitively complex than these common experimental tasks, given that narratives are intrinsically dependent on the story-teller’s causal thinking structure (Trabasso & Broek, ).  The choice of a term often reflects the story-teller’s conception of the story (Downing, ).  Downing showed that monolingual adults commonly used a basic kind term for most nouns when telling a story.  However, these adults deviated from basic terms when they were trying to convey an attitude or perspective on the story.  In narratives, it is more important to construct a story grammar, i. e.  the story-teller needs to represent the narrative events and describe the story units in a sequential order (Herman, .  Mandler, ), than to remember a particular word.  Therefore, the selection of what is important to remember and to retell relies on the relationships between narrative events and their representation of the story (Trabasso & Broek, ).  Although several authors have investigated the development of narratives in children (e. g.  Pearson, .  see also Verhoeven & Lundquist, ), none of them investigated lexical choice in terms of lexicon organization and strategies used to refer to target concepts.  As far as we know, Downing () was the only one who investigated lexical choice in narratives in such terms, and then only in a group of monolingual adults.  This dearth in the literature does not permit us to make clear predictions about how bilingual children, with greater lexical access difficulties, would choose words differently from monolingual children in the context of a narrative task.  Therefore, before we address the principal question guiding this research, we first propose two background studies to allow us to characterize how younger children (Study ) and adult late second language (L) learners (Study ) access words in a narrative context.  If bilingual children’s lexical choices resemble those of younger children, then they could be characterized as demonstrating developmental delay.  If their choices resemble those of the adult late L learners, then they could be characterized as demonstrating compensatory strategies, but not general communicative delay.  Conceptual delay in lexical access.  Some authors have proposed that lexical organization and retrieval reflect lexical development, and may be a fairer semantic assessment than acquired vocabulary (de Villers, .  Seymour, Roeper & de Villiers, ).  Previous studies have characterized lexical access differences between bilinguals and same-aged monolinguals as developmental delays (e. g.  Keith & Nicoladis, ).  If so, bilingual children with lexical access delay might resemble younger children in their way of choosing words to convey a story.  Study  compares three- to five-year-old and seven- to ten-year-old monolingual children.  We thought that younger children might be more likely than older children to omit target concepts, either because they cannot access them, or because their story grammars are still rudimentary (Hayes & Kelly, ).  If so, they might tell shorter stories (i. e.  use fewer word tokens to tell the story) and lexicalize fewer target words.  Another possible manifestation of conceptual delay could be observed in children’s lexical organization and the non-target word choices.  Previous research has suggested that monolingual children’s mental lexicons show a shift in relations between words around approximately seven and ten years of age, from primarily schematic to primarily categorical relations (Brown & Berko, .  Danovitch & Keil, .  Nelson, .  Perraudin & Mounoud, .  Sheng, McGregor & Marian, ).  Schematic relations are connections established between words when taking into consideration how they follow each other in a discourse or between objects and their relations in the physical word (Perraudin & Mounoud, ).  Categorical relations refer to taxonomic relations between words or objects (Perraudin & Mounoud, .  see also Nelson, , for a similar conceptualization of the developmental shift in the mental lexicon).  For example, if we show children a picture with dog on it and ask them to say the first word that comes to mind, some may give an answer guided by the schematic relation like bone (e. g.  dogs may be associated with the action of hiding or gnawing on a bone).  Others may give an answer showing a categorical relationship with a word like cat, since both cat and dog are from the same taxonomic category, animals.  In the context of a narrative task, children who have not yet undergone the schematic–categorical shift might not necessarily use words that could be helpful to the listener’s comprehension when they do not produce the non-target word.  For example, they might produce nouns with schematic relations to the target words (such as tail for the target cat).  Some studies of simultaneous bilingual children have shown little to no difference from monolinguals for schematic or categorical responses (Namei, .  Reustle, .  Sheng et al. , ), and others have found that bilinguals produce more schematic responses than same-aged monolinguals (Keith & Nicoladis, .  see also Verhallen & Schoonen, ).  Generally these studies used picture-naming or word-association tasks to assess these differences.  For instance, one study showed that seven- to ten-year-old simultaneous French–English bilinguals produced more schematically related words on a picture-naming task than monolinguals (Keith & Nicoladis, ).  The rate of schematically related words was negatively correlated to children’s vocabulary in each of their languages.  It is possible that studies have found differing results with simultaneous bilinguals because they can vary in whether their vocabulary size differs or equals that of monolinguals.  Consistent with that interpretation, Sheng et al.  () found no significant difference in English vocabulary scores between the Mandarin–English bilingual children and the monolingual children, and also no differences between the groups on the rate of schematic-based choices.  The link between vocabulary size in a particular language and the schematic–categorical shift could explain why we observe schematic choices in adult and child second language learners.  L learners have been reported to produce more schematic responses in their L than in their L, and more than native speakers (Norrby & Hakansson, .  Zareva, ).  The same pattern of results has been observed with sequential bilingual children (Verhallen & Schoonen, ).  The use of categorical relations increases as L learners’ proficiency in L increases (Zareva, ).  In sum, some researchers have argued that, to the extent that bilingual children show differences from same-aged monolinguals in lexical access, they may be showing a developmental delay.  In the context of a narrative task, developmental delay in lexical access could be manifested in the form of shorter stories, fewer instances of lexicalizing particular words, and less frequent use of categorical responses when the non-target word is produced.  In Study , we test whether these characteristics are, indeed, true of younger monolingual children relative to older monolingual children.  Compensatory strategies for lexical access difficulties.  As noted above, recounting a narrative involves remembering and imaging what one would like to say.  Bilingual children might be at least as advanced in the underlying cognitive abilities necessary for narration relative to same-aged monolinguals.  For instance, Pearson () showed that, after correcting for multiple analyses, bilingual children performed as well as monolingual children in narrative discursive elements (e. g.  mention of key content, event sequence, and reference to characters).  If so, when they could not access particular words important for narration, they might use other means to express them. 