Learning in any school subject depends on students’ proﬁciency in listening comprehension in academic contexts (Rost, 1994).  Classroom discourse has, for example, repeatedly been found to facilitate the acquisition of reading comprehension (cf.  Nystrand, 2006.  Wolf, Crosson, & Resnick, 2005).  Consequently, listening comprehension in academic contexts may be regarded as a basis for the acquisition of knowledge and academic achievement.  For the most part, communication in academic contexts is marked by a high level of “writtenness,” whether information is presented written or orally.  Academic listening texts possess characteristics of formal and planned discourse as they are lexically dense, context reduced, and characterized by textual structures that resemble those of written texts (Flowerdew & Miller, 1997).  Classroom talk may thus be localized at the interface of an oral–literate continuum where “oral” refers to prototypical speaking in everyday conversations and “literate” refers to prototypical writing in academic prose (Biber, 1995.  Tannen, 1982).  Although oral academic language is often less complex and contains fewer academic language features than written academic language (cf.  Corson, 1997.  Nagy & Townsend, 2012), oral and written academic language share important features, such as an informational focus and an abstract, impersonal style (Csomay, 2006).  Oral language in academic settings is therefore more complex and more difﬁcult to process than oral language in everyday conversations.  Accordingly, several researchers have assumed that everyday listening and academic listening comprehension may rely on different sets of subskills and have proposed deﬁnitions of academic listening comprehension and its components (cf.  Ferris & Tagg, 1996.  Richards, 1983.  Taylor & Geranpayeh, 2011).  Most of these deﬁnitions are based on the presumption that academic listening comprehension requires the listener to concentrate on as well as understand long stretches of speech without being able to use the facilitating functions of interactive discourse (Flowerdew, 1994).  For this particular type of listening comprehension, some authors propose speciﬁc comprehension subskills, such as the “differentiation between relevant and irrelevant information,” “command of strategies that support understanding (i. e. , taking notes),” “the ability to identify the topic, purpose and scope of a lecture,” or “making inferences” (e. g. , Buck, 2001.  Flowerdew, 1995.  Richards, 1983).  Yet it remains unclear how these skills may be operationalized and to what extent they are speciﬁc for listening in academic contexts.  To describe challenges of academic listening comprehension, it thus seems useful to resort to more general conceptualizations of academic language.  CHALLENGES OF ACADEMIC LANGUAGE.  The general differentiation between language skills needed to interact with others in informal contexts and those needed to understand school-related language has been addressed by various researchers (e. g. , Bailey & Butler, 2003.  Schleppegrell, 2004).  An important conceptual basis of this line of research was the distinction between basic interpersonal communication skills (BICS) and cognitive academic language proﬁciency (CALP) proposed by Cummins (1980).  According to Cummins (1980), BICS are deﬁned as the language skills needed in social situations.  When people interact with each other, their communication usually requires BICS because it occurs in a meaningful context and is thus relatively easy to understand and cognitively not very demanding.  In contrast, CALP is needed to understand language in context-reduced settings and is cognitively demanding, such as when abstract ideas or concepts are presented.  CALP thus primarily pertains to language typically used in academic contexts and can be deﬁned as “the extent to which an individual has access to and command of the oral and written academic registers of schooling” (Cummins, 2000, p.  67).  The differentiation between BICS and CALP served as a basis for further conceptualizations of academic language.  To date, there is no single deﬁnition of what constitutes academic language, and a variety of terms have been suggested to label the construct, such as “language of schooling,” “scientiﬁc language,” or “advanced literacy” (cf.  Snow & Uccelli, 2009).  The US-based National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing (CRESST) has developed a conceptualization of academic language that adds additional features to the CALP deﬁnition of academic language (Bailey & Butler, 2003).  According to this view, academic language can be deﬁned as “the language that is used by teachers and students for the purpose of acquiring new knowledge and skills, imparting new information, describing abstract ideas, and developing students’ conceptual understanding” (Chamot & O’Malley, 1994, p.  40).  On the content level, academic language is characterized by cognitively demanding school-related topics, such as lectures on abstract concepts or ideas (Bailey & Butler, 2003.  Eckhardt, 2008).  It is also context reduced to a certain extent.  the information conveyed is often removed from its immediate context (i. e. , there is a very limited amount of shared knowledge or context between speaker and listener.  cf.  Curenton & Justice,Academic language is associated with the mastery of speciﬁc genres, command of speciﬁc reasoning and argumentative strategies that are characteristic for academic domains (Snow & Uccelli, 2009), as well as with language features that pertain to speciﬁc cognitive procedures, such as generalization or abstraction (cf.  Feilke, 2012.  Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 2014.  Heller & Morek, 2015.  Nagy & Townsend, 2012).  To convey these functions, it is characterized by a more sophisticated use of grammar and vocabulary than everyday language and requires the mastery of an extensive range of linguistic features (Scarcella & Rumberger, 2000).  On the semantic level, academic language is characterized by functional academic vocabulary (e. g. , synthesize and denominator) that students encounter at school but rarely in less formal social settings (Bailey & Butler, 2003.  Uesseler, Runge, & Redder, 2013).  English academic language has also been described as lexically dense and, on the syntactic level, comprising verb forms in passive voice, long and complex noun, and prepositional phrases, nominalizations, and participial modiﬁers (Abedi & Lord, 2001.  Schleppegrell, 2004).  During the last few years, a number of authors have also proposed taxonomies of academic language in German (e. g. , Feilke, 2012.  Gogolin & Lange, 2011.  Uesseler et al. , 2013.  Vollmer & Th¨urmann, 2010).  Morek and Heller (2012) offer a synopsis of the lexical, grammatical, and discourse features that have been described in these taxonomies.  According to this conceptualization, the academic register is characterized by the features described in Table 1.  For the most part, these features correspond to the language features that have been suggested as characteristics of academic language in English (e. g. , Bailey, Huang, Shin, Farnsworth, & Butler, 2007.  Snow & Uccelli, 2009).  Academic language in German and English is marked by a frequent use of the features described above, whereas these features occur to a lesser extent in everyday language (cf.  Bailey, 2007.  Schleppegrell, 2004).  Accordingly, several researchers have argued that texts may be located on a continuum, with texts containing everyday language and academic language features at the end points (Berendes, Dragon, Weinert, Heppt, & Stanat, 2013.  Snow, 2010).  However, to date it remains unclear whether understanding listening texts that contain predominantly academic versus everyday language features is associated with different cognitive processes and hence with different facets of listening comprehension.  several years of schooling in their L1 tend to acquire L2 academic language faster than younger children who did not attend school in their L1 (Collier, 1989).  However, even the academic language skills of advanced L2 learners may not reach those of L1 students (Mason, 1995).  CRITICISM OF AND EMPIRICAL RESULTS ON ACADEMIC LANGUAGE.  The differentiation between BICS and CALP proposed by Cummins (2000) has been criticized for a variety of reasons (for an overview, see Cummins, 2008).  The concept might be of limited practical utility (Scarcella, 2003) because it does not specify which language skills are encompassed in CALP (Snow & Uccelli, 2009) and thus may not sufﬁce to construct tasks and promote learning.  Given the absence of a detailed description of CALP skills, Edelsky et al.  (1983) propose that academic language is an artifact of the way it is measured and hence represents nothing but a form of “testwiseness. ” Furthermore, it is questionable whether everyday language is always contextualized and less cognitively demanding than academic language.  Persuasion, deceiving, or winning over others in everyday life, for example, requires cognitive abilities as complex as those needed to comprehend a persuasive argument in a social studies textbook (Bailey & Huang, 2011).  To date, only few studies have sought to differentiate academic language and everyday language empirically.  Evidence concerning the assumed differences between everyday conversational listening and academic listening is particularly scarce (Buck, 2001).  In Germany, ﬁrst studies are presently carried out to identify German academic language features on an empirical basis.  Most of these studies analyze language features occurring in German academic textbooks in the upper grades (Ahrenholz, 2013.  Ahrenholz & Maak, 2012.  Meurers, Berendes, Vajjala, & Bryant, 2015).  Furthermore, a current research project aims at establishing a corpus of the German language used in schools.  This corpus comprises transcripts of oral communication in German classrooms as well as textbooks and written texts by students in the primary grades (K¨ohne, Kronenwerth, Redder, Schuth, & Weinert, 2015).  Although conclusive results from these projects are not yet available, preliminary ﬁndings indicate that the features discussed as characteristics of German academic language on a theoretical basis do occur in classroom discourse and textbooks.  Research that focused on written English language has also provided some empirical support for the assumption that academic and everyday language might be separable.  Schleppegrell (2004) analyzed linguistic features of academic texts and transcripts of everyday conversations and found evidence for the theoretically postulated differences between academic and everyday language.  In a similar vein, a number of studies indicated that the linguistic complexity of test items in mathematics or science tests impacted item difﬁculties differentially (e. g. , Martiniello, 2008.  Shaftel, Belton-Kocher, Glasnapp, & Poggio, 2006).  The speciﬁc difﬁculty of test items containing academic language features compared to items containing everyday language features provides some support for the assumption of different language registers.  For listening comprehension of academic language, Shohamy and Inbar (1991) investigated the effects of different types of listening texts (oral oriented vs.  literal oriented) on L2 students in 12th grade.  The authors did not explicitly mention that they were measuring academic and everyday listening comprehension, but the operationalization of the oral/literate listening texts is in line with central assumptions on academic and everyday listening.  The results indicate that listening texts containing academic language features were signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult to process for the L2 listeners than everyday listening texts, thus supporting the notion that academic listening poses special demands on L2 listeners.  Because Shohamy and Inbar (1991) did not include an L1 comparison group in their study, however, it remains unclear whether differences in academic versus everyday listening comprehension may also be found in native students and whether L2 listeners are differentially affected by academic language.  Furthermore, the main focus of this study was on oral versus literate texts, such that the authors did not include all features that may be relevant to differentiate academic from everyday listening.  An initial study in Germany offers empirical support for the differentiation of German academic versus everyday listening in terms of the underlying morphosyntactic and lexical features (Gantefort & Roth, 2010.  Roth, Neumann, & Gogolin, 2007).  In this study with bilingual elementary students in Grade 4, oral classroom discourse was videotaped, transliterated, and then analyzed using conﬁrmatory factor analysis.  The authors thus were able to identify different modes of oral language within the classrooms.  First, a conversational mode, in which students used colloquial language, such as high-frequency words or colloquial expressions, and second, an academic mode, which was marked by a high frequency of nominalizations, compounds, clause connectors, and impersonal expressions.  Third, the authors identiﬁed an elaborated mode, which was characterized by the frequent use of subjunctives and constructions in passive voice.  The authors postulate that the main features of German academic language are those typical for the academic and the elaborated mode (cf.  Gantefort & Roth, 2010).  However, it must be noted that no transcripts of conversational language outside the classroom were made, thus leaving unclear whether the conversational mode adequately reﬂects the conversational language students use in their everyday lives.  In line with theories on academic language in L2 students, some studies with English language learners have lent support to the notion that academic language may be especially difﬁcult to acquire for these students.  Uccelli, Galloway, Barr, Meneses, and Dobbs (2015), for example, investigated academic language proﬁciency in elementary school students.  Their operationalization of academic language skills not only pertains to the linguistic features of the register but also offers a more integrated conceptualization of academic language, including further skills such as connecting ideas logically or tracking participants and themes.  The results from this study indicate that L2 students performed more poorly than L1 students on the academic language test.  Similarly, Townsend, Filippini, Collins, and Biancarosa (2012) showed that L1 middle school students outperformed their L2 counterparts on a measure of academic vocabulary.  It must be noted that both studies focused on academic language competencies, but did not investigate students’ everyday language competencies.  Hence, these studies do not provide evidence that differences in L1 and L2 students’ academic language competencies might be more pronounced than differences in their everyday language competencies.  A number of other studies have challenged the assumption that academic language is particularly difﬁcult for L2 students (Eckhardt, 2008.  Heppt, Stanat, Dragon, Berendes, & Weinert, 2014).  Eckhardt (2008) reported for German elementary students that L1 and L2 students performed less well on listening comprehension tasks that contained complex grammatical features and academic vocabulary.  Furthermore, she found weaker performance for both groups of students on texts with school-related contents as opposed to texts with everyday contents.  In a third study, Eckhardt (2008) varied the contextual embedding of the listening comprehension tasks.  Texts that were context reduced (verbally described ﬁlm scenes) were clearly more difﬁcult to understand for elementary school students than texts that were supported by visual context (acted ﬁlm scenes).  Contrary to the author’s expectation, these characteristics did not generally affect the performance of L2 students more than the performance of L1 students.  Only for texts that contained school-related content, Eckhardt (2008) found L2 students’ performance to be more strongly affected than L1 students’ performance, but this effect disappeared when students’ socioeconomic background was controlled.  This ﬁnding adds to a number of studies indicating that children from different socioeconomic backgrounds differ considerably in terms of language proﬁciency (Hoff, 2013).  Aarts et al.  (2011), for example, point out that mothers from families of high socioeconomic status (SES) tend to use more academic language features when talking to their children than mothers from families of lower SES.  Given that L2 students are often disadvantaged in terms of their socioeconomic background (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010), it is necessary to disentangle effects of language background and SES when comparing academic language skills in L1 and L2 students.  Taken together, empirical research has supported the assumption that processing academic language can be more difﬁcult than processing everyday language.  Contrary to theoretical assumptions on academic language, however, studies have not consistently shown that L2 students are disproportionally disadvantaged in their comprehension of academic language when compared to L1 students.  This may result from the fact that most studies have focused on beginning level L2 learners with limited language skills, or on students in elementary grades.  Because academic language closely resembles everyday language in elementary grades, it may be assumed that disadvantages of L2 students with academic language texts do not become visible until the later grades, when language becomes increasingly demanding in terms of academic features (Chudaske, 2012).  Furthermore, previous research has focused on academic language in terms of classiﬁcation of texts and tasks.  Yet, academic language is associated with speciﬁc language characteristics, such as sophisticated grammatical and lexical features that are associated with speciﬁc cognitive processes and demand a more elaborated language proﬁciency than that needed to process everyday language (cf.  Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 2014.  Scarcella & Rumberger, 2000).  It may therefore be assumed that the processing of academic language constitutes a speciﬁc facet of language proﬁciency.  It remains unclear, however, whether listening comprehension of academic language and everyday language are associated with distinct facets of language proﬁciency.  RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESES.  To date, the ﬁndings on academic language comprehension in older students are inconclusive and empirical evidence on the differentiation between academic and everyday language comprehension is scarce.  In our study, we varied features of academic language and investigated whether listening comprehension of academic language and listening comprehension of everyday language may be separable on the basis of these features in a sample of adolescent L1 and L2 students.  Because grammatical features and, even more so, vocabulary knowledge are the most important aspects of academic oral proﬁciency in learning another language (Nagy & Townsend, 2012.  Saville-Troike, 1984), we based our study on the CRESST deﬁnition of academic language that puts a special emphasis on linguistic features of academic language.  The following research questions and hypotheses are addressed.  1.  Can listening comprehension of academic language and everyday language be differentiated on the basis of features of academic language suggested in the literature (school-based content, reduced context, linguistic complexity).  We expect that academic language comprehension and everyday language comprehension may be distinguished empirically and that they show differential correlations to students’ vocabulary and syntactic knowledge.  More speciﬁcally, we assume students’ vocabulary and syntactic knowledge to be more closely associated with their academic language comprehension than with their everyday language comprehension because academic language is assumed to entail vocabulary and syntactic features that are more difﬁcult to process.  2.  Are there performance differences between adolescent L1 and L2 students in listening comprehension of academic and everyday language.  We expect L2 students to generally perform lower than L1 students on measures of listening comprehension.  Based on theoretical assumptions that assume academic language to be more challenging for L2 adolescents than for L1 adolescents, we predict that these performance differences are more pronounced for listening comprehension of academic language than for listening comprehension of everyday language.  <Middle>Participants.  There were 479 students from 20 schools who took part in the study.  Of these, 20 students did not complete any of the test items and were therefore excluded from the analyses, resulting in a total of 459 students (45% female, 55% male).  All students were in ninth grade, and their mean age was 16. 3 years (SD = 0. 9).  The majority of students (43%) attended the lowest secondary school track of the German educational system (Hauptschule), 25% attended the intermediate track (Realschule), and 32% attended a comprehensive school (Gesamtschule), which provides several courses of education under one roof.  All schools were public schools with 60% or more students with an immigration background and were located in urban districts with a high proportion of low-income or immigrant background population.  Students who reported to have learned German as their L1 within their families were designated as the L1 group (n = 173).  Students who reported a language other than German as their L1 were designated as the L2 group (n = 286).  The most frequent L1s in the latter group were Turkish (70. 0%), Arabic (7. 2%), and Italian (6. 7%).  Although most L2 students were born in Germany (76. 6%), the majority indicated speaking a language other than German in their homes (67. 9%).  Most of the L2 students (89. 9%) started speaking German before the age of 6 years, such that they had been speaking German for at least 10 years.  Another 3. 2% of L2 students had acquired German for more than 7 years, and the remaining 6. 9% of L2 students had started acquiring German after the age of 10 years.  The latter students’ teachers evaluated their German language skills as being sufﬁciently developed.  hence, none of these students was excluded from the analyses.  All L1 students were born in Germany and had parents who were born in Germany.  L1 and L2 students of our sample were distributed across the educational tracks in a similar manner, χ2 (2) = 0. 44, p = . 80.  The language groups did not differ in terms of age, F (1, 421) = 1. 28, p = . 26, or gender, χ2 (1) = 0. 10, p = . 75.  Furthermore, we found no group differences in students’ basic cognitive abilities, F (1, 391) = 2. 43, p = . 12, as measured with a test on ﬁgural analogies (Kognitiver F¨ahigkeitstest f¨ur 4.  bis 12.  Klassen, Revision [Test of Cognitive Abilities for Grades 4 to 12, Revised].  Heller & Perleth, 2000).  Instruments.  Listening comprehension of academic and everyday language.  To assess listening comprehension of academic and everyday language, we developed a computerbased test.  Students listened to German texts with a length of 100 to 150 words varying between 42 and 65 s in duration.  All listening passages were written for the test and were spoken by German native speakers.  Four texts (50%) were dialogues between two persons (1 male, 1 female), two texts were narratives delivered by one speaker (25%), and two texts were expository texts (25%) delivered by one speaker.  After listening to each of the eight texts, students answered 3 to 5 items, resulting in a total of 32 questions.  Questions were either in multiple-choice format with four response options (19 items, 59%) or in constructed-response format requiring a short written response (13 items, 41%).  Items either pertained to the texts’ main idea, for example, deciding on where a conversation may have taken place (17 items, 53%), or aimed at local details included in the listening passage, for example, remembering a given deﬁnition (15 items, 47%).  Students were given 1 point if they chose the correct answer from the multiple-choice questions and 0 points if they chose a wrong option.  Constructed response items were coded following a coding scheme and were scored in the same way.  The texts were only presented acoustically, while all test items were presented acoustically as well as in written form on the computer screen.  As the focus of our study was on verbal aspects of academic language, we did not use visual input (e. g. , videos) to accompany the listening texts.  The listening comprehension test consisted of two subtests.  one was designed to capture listening comprehension of academic language and the other listening comprehension of everyday language.  Both subtests included four listening texts with 16 items, respectively.  Academic texts had contents pertaining to more formal settings (e. g. , a job interview) and were context reduced, that is, provided less information on the characters and the setting of the plot than the everyday texts.  On the linguistic level, academic texts had more syntactic features that are typical for written discourse and have been discussed as being relevant for German academic language (cf.  Morek & Heller, 2012), namely, passive voice, complex subordinate clauses, and complex noun phrases.  Vocabulary was rated as academic following the CRESST coding scheme for academic vocabulary (Butler, Bailey, Stevens, & Huang, 2004).  Two associate professors of German linguistics who were blind to the research questions and the designated classiﬁcation of the texts rated the difﬁculty of the syntactic features, the vocabulary, and the context on a scale ranging from 1 = very easy to 6 = very difﬁcult.  Units with academic listening texts were rated to be more difﬁcult in syntactic features (M = 3. 88, SD = 1. 79), vocabulary (M = 3. 25, SD = 0. 71), and content (M = 3. 25, SD = 0. 50) than units with everyday language (M = 2. 75, SD = 0. 89 for syntactic features.  M = 2. 75, SD = 0. 71 for vocabulary.  and M = 1. 5, SD = 1. 03 for content).  Interrater reliability for the two raters was acceptable for syntactic features (κ = 0. 69, p < . 01), vocabulary (κ = 0. 70, p < . 01), and content (κ = 0. 66, p < . 01).  Besides the variation of syntax and content, academic listening texts were constructed such that they contained more academic vocabulary (e. g. , syllable and to curtail) than everyday listening texts.  To classify vocabulary as academic or everyday vocabulary, three raters classiﬁed each word in the listening texts following the CRESST criteria (Butler et al. , 2004).  Interrater reliability for the three raters was κ = 0. 66 (p < . 01).  Appendix A provides an overview of the listening text features for academic and everyday language units.  Sample texts and items can be found in Appendix B.  As described above, academic listening and everyday listening texts differed in terms of their linguistic features, their content, and their contextualization.  However, items for academic units as well as those for everyday units were constructed such that they were comparable in terms of their linguistic difﬁculty.  Academic language and everyday language units were comparable pertaining to the number of items in multiple-choice versus constructed-response format, as well as in terms of items on main ideas versus local details from the text.  The tests’ internal consistency was α = 0. 71 for academic listening comprehension and α = 0. 59 for everyday listening comprehension.  The manifest correlation between the two subtests was r = . 54 (p < . 01).  Vocabulary.  We assessed vocabulary using the Culture Fair Intelligence Test— Scale A (Weiß, 2006).  The test consists of 30 multiple-choice items that require students to ﬁnd a synonym for a given German word from a list of ﬁve words.  Its internal consistency was α = 0. 81.  Syntactic knowledge.  To assess students’ syntactic knowledge, we developed a computer-based test that consists of written sentences with various syntactical structures.  Students had to decide for each sentence whether it was syntactically correct or not.  To control for guessing, students could choose between the answers incorrect, correct, and unclear, with the latter option indicating that they were uncertain in their judgment (sample item.  Is the following sentence grammatically correct or incorrect.  “I to bed went late yesterday. ” correct—incorrect—unclear).  The unclear option was later coded as wrong.  The test includes 22 items and had an internal consistency of α = 0. 86 in the study sample.  SES.  We used the Index of Economic, Social, and Cultural Status (ESCS.  Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2010) as an indicator of students’ SES.  This measure is also employed in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) studies and has a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1 in the PISA student population.  The components comprising the ESCS are the families’ home possessions (such as books at home, cars, and televisions), the highest parental occupation as measured by the International Socioeconomic Index of Occupational Status (Ganzeboom, De Graaf, & Treiman, 1992), and the highest parental education in years of schooling.  When levels of parental occupation or education differ for mother and father, the highest level is used to indicate a families’ occupational and educational status, respectively.  All data were obtained with student and parent questionnaires.  Analyses.  We ﬁrst tested the measures of listening comprehension, vocabulary, and syntactic knowledge for items displaying differential item functioning (DIF) as a function of language background.  DIF occurs when students with comparable abilities but from different groups have different probabilities of success on an item (Clauser & Mazor, 1998).  Item DIF can be adverse or benign (e. g. , Gierl, 2005).  Benign item DIF is typically due to a multidimensionality of the construct and should therefore not be eliminated from the test.  Adverse DIF can be attributed to the presence of nuisance dimensions and therefore threatens construct validity, such that items displaying adverse DIF between L1 and L2 students should be omitted.  DIF for each item was operationalized as the difference of item logit parameters between L1 and L2 students.  The values were judged not only in terms of statistical signiﬁcance but also in terms of effect size.  Logit differences above 0. 64 are considered as large magnitude DIF (cf.  Wilson, 2005, p.  167).  DIF, which persists in a two-dimensional Rasch model of listening comprehension, is considered to be adverse.  Items that displayed adverse and large magnitude DIF for the language groups were excluded from the following analyses.  The DIF analyses were conducted using the computer program ConQuest 2. 0 (Wu, Adams, Wilson, & Haldane, 2007).  To test the ﬁrst hypothesis on the separability of everyday listening and academic listening comprehension, we conducted a conﬁrmatory factor analysis using Mplus 7. 11 (Muth´en & Muth´en, 1998–2012).  Students’ ESCS score was entered as a manifest covariate into the analyses.  We estimated a two-dimensional model with items loading either on an academic or on an everyday language factor and then compared this model to a unidimensional model with a global factor of listening comprehension.  Parameter estimates for the models are based on the robust weighted least square estimator for categorical outcomes (Muth´en & Muth´en, 1998–2012).  We used the comparative ﬁt index, the Tucker–Lewis index, and the root mean square error of approximation to evaluate goodness of ﬁt.  Models with a Tucker–Lewis index and comparative ﬁt index coefﬁcient higher than 0. 95 and a root mean square error of approximation coefﬁcient smaller than 0. 06 are regarded as good approximations to the data (Hu & Bentler, 1999).  The models were then compared using chi-square difference tests.  A signiﬁcant chisquare difference of nested models suggests that the less restrictive model ﬁts the data better than the more restrictive model.  To further investigate dimensionality, we estimated correlations between listening comprehension of academic and everyday language and receptive vocabulary and syntactic knowledge within the models.  As listening comprehension of academic language is more complex than listening comprehension of everyday language in terms of vocabulary and syntax, listening comprehension of academic language should be more strongly associated with vocabulary and syntax than listening comprehension of everyday language.  Both external criteria were modeled as unidimensional latent variables. 