 Many high-risk, high-consequence technical environments, including air trafﬁc control, hydroelectric power generation, and emergency services, are characterized by time pressure, uncertainty, and dynamic relationships between components (Orasanu & Connolly, 1993).  The safe and efﬁcient management of these environments is reliant upon effective communication between operators, where any communication error has the potential for a signiﬁcant loss (Australian Transport Safety Bureau, 2007).  The process of communication within such domains is inherently a joint activity between communicative partners (Clark, 1994.  Clark & Schaefer, 1989).  Models of dialogue structure, such as the collaborative model (Clark, 1994.  Clark & Brennan, 1991.  Clark & Schaefer, 1987, 1989.  Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986), emphasize that both communicative partners have a shared responsibility to ensure that information exchanged has been appropriately heard and understood before the conversation proceeds.  A communicative exchange involves two distinct stages.  the presentation of information and the grounding of that information (Clark & Schaefer, 1987).  During the presentation stage, the sender will provide information for the receiver to interpret and from which meaning can be derived.  During the grounding stage, the sender and receiver collaborate to ensure that the receiver has understood the sender’s intended message (Clark & Brennan, 1991.  Clark & Schaefer, 1987).  For grounding to take place, the receiver must demonstrate evidence of understanding to the sender, and the sender must accept the evidence as true.  When the process of grounding is successful, the utterance from the sender is referred to as “common ground” between the two communicative participants (Clark & Schaefer, 1987, p.  19).  MISCOMMUNICATION.  Although the objective of any communicative transaction is to ensure mutual understanding between all participants (Dascal & Berenstein, 1987), communication has been identiﬁed as a contributing factor in a signiﬁcant proportion of errors within many high-risk industries (Kim, Park, Han, & Kim, 2010).  For example, Billings and Cheaney (1981) noted that information transfer difﬁculties were a primary factor in over 70% of cases reported to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Aviation Safety Reporting System.  Similarly, Greenberg et al.  (2007) reported that miscommunication contributed to almost a quarter of surgical malpractice claims that led to patient harm.  Miscommunication is the broad term used to encompass the various types of communicative problems that can occur in discourse (Skantze, 2005).  There are two main types of miscommunication.  misunderstandings and nonunderstandings (Hirst, McRoy, Heeman, Edmonds, & Horton, 1994).  In a misunderstanding, receivers are under the incorrect assumption that they have understood the instruction and thus remain unaware that an error in discourse has occurred (Hirst et al. , 1994.  Skantze, 2005).  In contrast, a nonunderstanding refers to instances where a receiver does not obtain any meaningful interpretation of a message or is unable to select from two or more interpretations of a message (Skantze, 2005).  A nonunderstanding involves conscious awareness of a partial or complete lack of understanding and can be disclosed or concealed (Weigand, 1999).  A disclosed nonunderstanding occurs when a receiver fails to understand a message and alerts the sender that the message has not been understood.  In contrast, a concealed nonunderstanding occurs when the receiver fails to understand a message, but deceptively conceals this state of nonunderstanding from the sender (Weigand, 1999).  THE READBACK/HEARBACK COMMUNICATIVE PROTOCOL.  While nonunderstandings can occur in many different types of communicative exchanges, they can also threaten the effectiveness of the readback/hearback protocol.  This is a communications procedure that speciﬁes how verbal instructions are to be delivered and conﬁrmed over the radio/telephone (Prinzo & Britton, 1993).  Used in many different high-risk operational environments, including aviation, electricity transmission control, hydroelectric power generation, and more recently, in some healthcare settings, this protocol is used to reduce operator error and maintain the integrity of communication processes (Prabhakar et al. , 2012.  Prinzo & Britton, 1993).  This four-step protocol is initiated when a sender transmits a verbal message to a receiver (Federal Aviation Administration, 2015, Section 2-4-3).  For example, an air trafﬁc controller might send the following instruction to a pilot.  “Aircraft X, turn left to a heading of zero three zero” (Barshi & Farris, 2013, p.  2).  The receiver is then required to actively listen to the instruction before repeating the instruction verbatim back to the sender (known as the readback).  In the aviation context, a pilot would respond to the air trafﬁc controller with “Turning left to a heading of zero three zero, Aircraft X. ” The sender is then expected to listen to the readback to ensure that it has been repeated correctly, which is referred to as the hearback portion of the exchange (Cushing, 1995.  Prinzo & Britton, 1993.  Prinzo, Hendrix, & Hendrix, 2006).  The main purpose of the readback/hearback loop is to ensure that the receiver has accurately heard the instruction as the sender is able to identify and correct any errors made in the readback during the hearback portion of the exchange (Prinzo & Britton, 1993.  Prinzo et al. , 2006).  For example, if the sender hears the pilot incorrectly read back the instruction as “Turning left to a heading of zero three three, Aircraft X” during the hearback, the sender is expected to correct the misheard heading on the part of the pilot and reinitiate the readback/hearback loop until the correct instruction has been heard.  If a receiver is given an instruction that is not understood, this can be indicated to the sender in lieu of a readback (i. e. , disclosed nonunderstanding), allowing the information to be recommunicated until the instruction becomes common ground between the communicative participants (Streitenberger, Breen-Reid, & Harris, 2006).  Readback/hearback protocol limitation.  Although the readback/hearback protocol is an effective strategy for the identiﬁcation of misunderstandings and disclosed nonunderstandings, it does not necessarily protect against concealed nonunderstandings, because a nonunderstanding can be concealed, despite an accurate readback (Jones, 2003).  Concealed nonunderstandings on the part of the receiver in a readback/hearback exchange may also go undetected by a sender for various reasons.  For example, senders (of any communicative exchange) have a tendency to overestimate the extent to which they have successfully communicated the intended meaning of a message and, therefore, may not anticipate a lack of understanding (Fay, Page, & Serfaty, 2010.  Keysar & Henly, 2002).  Further, receivers may prefer to conceal a lack of understanding to “save face,” especially in those situations where there is an expectation that the instruction would normally be understood (Chiang & Pepper, 2006).  There is also an explicit expectation in many high-risk environments, including aviation, that the receipt of an accurate readback provides evidence to the sender that the message has been understood by the receiver (Federal Aviation Administration, 2014.  Morrow, Rodvold, & Lee, 1994).  Nevertheless, nonunderstandings, in spite of an accurate readback, do occur (Air Accidents Investigation Branch, 2008.  Billings & Cheaney, 1981.  Morrow et al. , 1994).  This suggests that the delivery of an accurate readback from a receiver does not necessarily provide the sender with adequate evidence during the grounding process to indicate that mutual understanding has taken place.  Reliance on auditory cues to gauge understanding.  The identiﬁcation of effective strategies that could improve the detection of nonunderstandings during the grounding process of readback/hearback exchanges is an important step in improving the integrity of this communication system.  For grounding to take place within a communicative exchange, the collaborative model suggests that the sender will rely on evidence from the receiver’s utterance to gauge whether or not the message has been understood as intended (Clark & Brennan, 1991).  Because the readback/hearback protocol takes place primarily over the radio/telephone, this evidence can only be derived from auditory cues, including the linguistic cues within the speech (the syllables, words, or phrases of an utterance) and the prosodic cues inherent in vocal communication (Drummond & Hopper, 1991.  Kanki & Smith, 2001.  Nygaard, Herold, & Namy, 2009.  Soskin, 1953).  Prosodic cues refer to the range of paralinguistic characteristics of the voice, such as tempo and intonation, that inﬂuence how something is said (Bolinger, 1985).  In the absence of visual cues, operators working in domains that rely on radio communication are exclusively dependent on linguistic and prosodic cues to determine levels of understanding.  Auton, Wiggins, Searle, Loveday, and Xu Rattanasone (2013) were the ﬁrst to investigate whether particular prosodic cues, when contained within a full readback spoken by a receiver, were salient to a sender (i. e. , listener of a readback) to gauge the extent to which the receiver had understood the instruction during the grounding process.  Using electricity transmission control as a context, Auton et al.  (2013) asked network operators to listen to a series of auditory-only, simulated readback/hearback communicative exchanges.  During each exchange, participants heard a sender delivering an instruction to a receiver, followed by the receiver delivering an accurate readback to the sender.  Auton et al.  systematically manipulated three prosodic cues contained within the readback (speciﬁcally, ﬁnal intonation, ﬁller, and interturn delay), to determine whether these cues signalled to a participant (i. e. , “listener”), the extent to which a receiver (i. e. , “speaker”) had understood an instruction.  These speciﬁc prosodic cues were derived from Brennan and Williams (1995) who examined the role of prosody during perceptions of uncertainty.  After listening to each exchange, participants were asked to rate the extent to which they perceived the receiver had understood the instruction based on the way the readback had been spoken.  Intonation is generally understood as the pitch patterns of a spoken utterance or the “melody” of speech, where there is a basic division between tunes falling in pitch (i. e. , falling intonation) and those rising in pitch (i. e. , rising intonation.  Bolinger, 1985.  Cruttenden, 1981.  Denes & Milton-William, 1962.  Hunter, 2004.  O’Connor & Arnold, 1961).  Interturn delay refers to the duration of silence between the end of one speaker’s utterance and the beginning of the other speaker’s response (Roberts, Francis, & Morgan, 2006).  An unﬁlled interturn delay refers to a delay that only contains silence, whereas a ﬁlled interturn delay refers to a delay that contains a ﬁller (a speech interjection, such as uh or um.  Clark & Fox Tree, 2002.  Goldman-Eisler, 1961).  Auton et al.  (2013) observed that the prosodic cues of ﬁnal intonation and ﬁller, when contained within the readback portion of the exchange, had the capacity to signal to a listener a receiver’s state of understanding.  In ﬁnal intonation, participants perceived that the receiver had a lower level of understanding of the instruction when the readback ended with rising intonation in comparison to falling intonation.  For ﬁller, participants perceived readbacks that were preceded by the ﬁller um as signaling a relatively lower level of understanding on the part of the receiver, compared to readbacks that were not preceded by a ﬁller.  Even though the duration of interturn delay had been found to be a useful cue during perceptions of uncertainty (Brennan & Williams, 1995), no association between perceptions of nonunderstanding and the duration of interturn delays was evident.  Utility of the linguistic content of the readback response to gauge understanding.  Although Auton et al.  (2013) demonstrated that particular prosodic cues were useful to network operators in detecting varying levels of understanding on the part of the receiver when a full readback was articulated, they did not consider whether such cues would be relied upon when a receiver responded with a partial readback.  In a partial readback response, the receiver does not repeat all the information in the instruction provided by the sender and, therefore, provides the sender with less linguistic evidence that an instruction has been understood (Barshi & Farris, 2013).  It is unclear from Auton et al.  (2013) whether the utility of ﬁnal intonation, ﬁller, and less so interturn delay, only exists when the precondition of a full readback is met.  Evidence from Brennan and Williams’ (1995) investigation into the usefulness of prosodic cues during perceptions of uncertainty suggest that these cues are still used by listeners to gauge a speaker’s level of certainty, even when the listener does not have evidence that the speaker’s linguistic response is accurate.  However, this proposition has not been tested empirically within the framework of nonunderstandings and the readback/hearback protocol.  Although there is an explicit expectation in many high-risk environments that operators provide a full readback to an issued instruction (i. e. , a receiver is to repeat the message back to the sender in full), procedural variations occur frequently.  For example, Morrow, Lee, and Rodvold (1993) observed that up to 13% of the routine pilot communication they analyzed contained partial, rather than full, readbacks.  Other investigators have reported similar ﬁgures (Cardosi, 1993.  Prinzo et al. , 2006).  If prosodic cues, such as ﬁnal intonation, ﬁller, and interturn delay, have the potential to be used as a training tool to improve operator detection of nonunderstandings, it is important to establish whether the use of such cues can be generalized across nonroutine responses to instructions (i. e. , during partial readback responses).  In addition to examining the potential interaction between prosodic cues and the linguistic content within a readback response during judgements of understanding, it is also important to assess whether the contrast between full and partial readback responses to an instruction affects perceptions of understanding.  Within many technical environments, there is an assumption that the receipt of a full readback from a receiver is necessary evidence to infer understanding on the part of the receiver (International Civil Aviation Organization, 2007).  Evidence from the conversation analytic literature supports this notion with partial repeats, especially those that end in rising intonation (partial questioning repeats), constituting repair initiations on the part of the speaker who uttered the repeat (Kim, 2002.  Robinson, 2013.  Schegloff, 2007).  Recovering from, or repairing, difﬁculties in communication can be either selfinitiated (executed by the communicator of the “trouble source”) or other initiated (executed by the communicator who is the recipient of the trouble source.  Schegloff, 2000.  Schegloff, Jefferson, & Sacks, 1977).  In cases where a sender presents a message for a receiver to understand and the receiver responds with a partial questioning repeat, this “other-initiated repair” could be perceived by the sender as an index of the receiver’s nonunderstanding of the instruction.  However, repetitions of speech tokens are not infrequent in everyday conversations (Schegloff, 1987) and partial questioning repeats are not used to exclusively convey insufﬁcient understanding of repeated items in context.  Partial questioning repeats can be used to convey (and are perceived to convey) a range of different social actions, such as emphasis, humor, hearing issues, stalling, disagreement with repeated tokens, imitation, and are also used to indicate receipt of a message (Kim, 2002.  Norrick, 1987.  Robinson, 2013.  Schegloff, 1997.  Tannen.  1987).  Therefore, while there may be an assumption, within technical domains, that a partial readback reﬂects insufﬁcient or inadequate understanding of the repeated tokens, the conversation analytic literature suggests partial readback can be a manifestation of many other issues in technical environments (such as excessive workload or simply a lack of adherenece to protocol on the part of the receiver).  It is important to test this assumption empirically, as the readback procedure (i. e. , the requirement of a full readback response) has been criticized as unnecessary and time consuming (Schneider, Healy, & Barshi, 2004).  If it is evident that a full readback does not provide a listener with evidence that the receiver has understood the instruction, additional supporting evidence may need to be considered in particular circumstances.  THE PRESENT STUDY.  This study extended the relatively limited literature examining the relationship between auditory cues and perceptions of nonunderstanding within a readback/hearback context.  Speciﬁcally, it capitalized on Auton et al.  (2013) in three critical ways.  While Auton et al.  used electricity transmission control as a context, this study assessed the utility of auditory cues during perceptions of nonunderstanding within the allied domain of hydroelectric power generation.  This is a high-risk, high-consequence environment in which the force of falling or ﬂowing water is used to generate electricity.  This study also differed from Auton et al.  (2013) by including an examination of the association between the amount of linguistic information contained within the readback response (full vs.  partial readback) and perceptions of nonunderstanding.  Of perhaps more theoretical and practical importance, the utility of prosodic cues during assessments of nonunderstanding was examined contingent upon the amount of linguistic content within the readback response.  Finally, this study incorporated a task whereby participants were asked concurrently to listen to communicative exchanges and read and recall a series of numeric digits.  The addition of the concurrent task was designed to better reﬂect the cognitive demands in the operational environment.  Referred to as the numeric digit span recall task, it was designed to impose a cognitive demand on participants, thereby restricting the cognitive resources available during assessments of nonunderstanding.  Research aim and hypotheses.  The aim of the present study was to examine how both linguistic and prosodic cues embodied within a receiver’s response to an instruction inﬂuenced perceptions of the extent to which a receiver had understood an instruction.  It was hypothesized that full readback responses to instructions would receive higher ratings of understanding compared to partial readback responses according to Hypothesis 1 (H1).  It was also predicted that full readback responses ending in rising intonation would attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction, compared to readback responses ending in falling intonation Hypothesis 2a (H2a).  Similarly, it was hypothesized that partial readback responses ending in rising intonation would receive lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to partial readback responses ending in falling intonation Hypothesis 2b (H2b).  For the prosodic cue “ﬁller,” hypotheses were speciﬁed for the two durations of interturn delay to identify any interaction between delay and ﬁller.  It was hypothesized that full readback responses preceded by a ﬁlled delay of 600 ms would attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to full readbacks that were preceded by an unﬁlled delay of the same duration (H3a).  Similarly, full readback responses preceded by a ﬁlled delay of 1200 ms were expected to attract lower ratings of understanding compared to full readbacks that were preceded by an unﬁlled delay of the same duration (H3b).  Partial readback responses preceded by a ﬁlled delay of 600 ms were expected to attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to partial readbacks that were preceded by an unﬁlled delay of 600 ms (H3c).  Similarly, partial readback responses preceded by a ﬁlled delay of 1200 ms were predicted to attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to partial readbacks that were preceded by an unﬁlled delay of 1200 ms (H3d).  Although Auton et al.  (2013) failed to identify interturn delay as a salient cue used by network operators during perceptions of nonunderstanding of full readback responses, it was unclear whether interturn delay would be useful in a different domain and/or when the linguistic cue associated with a full readback was unavailable (i. e. , during partial readback responses).  Therefore, it was hypothesized that full readback responses that commenced after a longer (1200 ms) interturn delay would attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to full readback responses that commenced after a shorter (600 ms) interturn delay (H4a).  Finally, it was predicted that partial readback responses that commenced after a longer (1200 ms) inteturn delay would attract lower ratings of understanding of the instruction compared to partial readback responses commencing after a shorter (600 ms) interturn delay (H4b).  Overview of methodology.  This study was undertaken within the domain of hydroelectric power generation.  The participants comprised hydroelectric power generation operators whose role is to monitor and diagnose system events through supervisory control and data acquisition visual interfaces and intervene where necessary to safeguard the supply of electricity.  These operators were selected as they generally follow the readback/hearback procedure when communicating over the radio/telephone, and therefore, they represented a sample in which the utilization of linguistic and prosodic cues during perceptions of nonunderstanding could be examined with a degree of ecological validity.  In comparison to environments like aviation, where the readback protocol is adhered to consistently, adherence to full readbacks within hydroelectric power generation varies between organizations.  In the hydroelectric domain, the communication process tends to be less formal and less structured, involving a combination of full and partial readbacks, depending upon organizational and task-speciﬁc circumstances.  Participants in this study were asked to listen to a series of scripted audio communicative exchanges through an online experimental platform.  Each exchange included a sender delivering an instruction and a receiver responding with either a full or a partial readback.  The readbacks varied systematically in the type of intonation heard at the end of the response, the presence of a ﬁller before the commencement of the response, and the duration of the interturn delay between speakers.  After listening to each exchange, participants were asked to indicate the extent to which they perceived that the receiver (who delivered the full or partial readback) had understood the instruction.  <Middle>Participants.  The participants were recruited from either online advertisements within a major US power generation magazine that has subscribers worldwide or through direct contact using a major hydroelectric power generation company in New Zealand.  A total of 34 operators completed the study, although 6 were subsequently excluded because they were not currently working within the ﬁeld of hydroelectric power generation nor had they reported any experience within this specialized ﬁeld.  As this study was completed online and in participants’ own time, all of the demographic data was provided via self-report.  Twenty-eight hydroelectric power generation operators from companies worldwide participated in the study.  Overall, an equal proportion of participants were from the United States (35. 7%) and New Zealand (35. 7%), with the remaining participants residing in various countries including England, Australia, Italy, and Croatia.  The sample was predominantly male (92. 9%), ranged in age from 29 to 74 years (M = 51. 96, SD = 8. 89), and had accumulated between 4 and 44 years of experience within power generation (M = 25. 13, SD = 11. 02).  Within the specialized ﬁeld of hydroelectric power generation, participants had accumulated between 2 and 44 years of experience (M = 20. 32, SD = 11. 34).  Before participants commenced the online study, they were advised in writing that only proﬁcient English speakers should complete the study due to the challenging nature of the tasks.  Participants were asked to self-report their native language and the number of years they had been speaking English.  The majority of the sample identiﬁed as native English speakers (85. 7%).  Of the four participants who identiﬁed as nonnative English speakers, the least experienced nonnative English speaker had been speaking English for 43. 48% of his life, and the most experienced nonnative English speaker had been speaking English for 75. 47% of his life.  Participants received a US $25 Amazon eVoucher in exchange for their completion of the study.  Materials.  The auditory readback task, incorporating the numeric digit span recall task, was created to assess the extent to which particular prosodic and linguistic cues inﬂuenced participants’ perceptions of nonunderstandings while listening to a series of readback/hearback exchanges.  Auditory readback task.  DESIGN.  The auditory readback task comprised a 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 (Communicative Exchange [1, 2] × Instruction Response Type [full readback, partial readback]× Final Intonation [rising, falling]× Filler [present, absent]× Interturn Delay [shorter, longer]) repeated measures, within-subjects design.  This resulted in 32 distinct communicative exchange conditions to which participants listened in random order.  After listening to each exchange, participants were asked to rate, on a 7-point Likert scale from 1 (did not understand at all) to 7 (understood completely), the extent to which they perceived that the receiver, who uttered the readback response, had understood the meaning of the instruction.  This type of scale was consistent with Brennan and Williams’ (1995) measure of perceptions of uncertainty and Auton et al. ’s (2013) measure of perceptions of nonunderstanding.  These ratings represented the dependent variable.  The design incorporated two, semantically distinct communicative exchanges to ensure that the semantic content of the exchanges did not inﬂuence prosodic cue use, and thus, were used as replicates of the other auditory cue conditions to ensure a more robust design.  Each communicative exchange consisted of a sender delivering an operational instruction to a receiver and a receiver responding to the instruction.  These two communicative exchanges differed in the type of operational tasks that the sender requested the receiver to execute.  “Instruction response type” referred to the nature of the response to the operational instruction in each of the two communicative exchanges, where the receiver responded with either a full readback (i. e. , the entire message was repeated back to the sender) or a partial readback (i. e. , the receipt of the instruction was acknowledged but the operational steps were not repeated).  “Final intonation” referred to whether the receiver’s readback response ended in either a rising intonation or a falling intonation.  “Filler” referred to the presence of a verbal interjection (i. e. , um) prior to the commencement of the response.  Finally, “interturn delay” referred to whether the delay between the sender delivering the instruction and the receiver responding was shorter (600 ms) or longer (1200 ms).  Stimuli development.  COMMUNICATIVE EXCHANGES.  The semantic content of the two communicative exchanges was developed in consultation with two subject matter experts from a major hydroelectric power generation company in New Zealand.  Each exchange consisted of an instruction that was likely to occur within the hydroelectric power generation industry, specifying the operational steps to be executed by the receiver, together with a response (either a full readback or a partial readback.  see Table 1).  The auditory versions of the communicative exchanges were recorded by two Australian English male speakers using a digital audio editor program (GarageBandTM) on a MacBook laptop.  One speaker assumed the role of the sender, who delivered the instruction in both exchanges, and the other speaker assumed the role of the receiver, who delivered the instruction responses associated with both exchanges.  Speakers maintained their allocated roles as either sender or receiver across both exchanges to prevent differences in voice timbre from inﬂuencing perceptions of nonunderstanding.  The duration of the communicative exchanges (including both the instruction and response) ranged from 10 to 13 s.  Prosodic manipulation of instruction response types.  The instruction response portion of each communicative exchange was manipulated to vary systematically the type of intonation at the end of the response, whether the receiver used a ﬁller (i. e. 