The ﬁeld of second language acquisition has always tried to understand the construct of aptitude, which has often been used to refer to cognitive abilities implicated in language learning (e. g. , Robinson, 2005a).  This interest stems from the need to understand the underlying cognitive processes involved in language learning.  Traditionally, aptitude was seen as the abilities that were measured by the Modern Language Aptitude Test (MLAT) developed by Carroll and Sapon in 1959.  The test contained ﬁve sections.  number learning, phonetic script, spelling cues, words in sentences, and paired associates, which were suggested to measure the following.  rote learning ability and memory, phonetic coding ability, inductive language learning, and grammatical sensibility.  Despite its shortcomings and the presence of new tests such as the Cognitive Ability for Novelty in Acquisition of Language—Foreign and the LLAMA Language Aptitude Test (see Skehan, 2012), the MLAT is still being widely used as it is considered one of the most successful predictors of language learning, both in instructional contexts (Ehrman & Oxford, 1995.  Erlam, 2005.  Harley & Hart, 1997.  Winke, 2013) and in laboratory studies (DeGraaff, 1997.  Robinson, 1997).  Nevertheless, and in order to account for the multicomponential view of the construct, current research prefers to report results on speciﬁc subtests of the MLAT rather than a composite score.  Two subtests that have been found to be good predictors of language learning are the paired associates subtest (e. g. , Hummel, 2009.  Robinson, 1997), which measures rote memory (RM), and the words in sentences subtest (e. g. , Erlam, 2005.  Li, 2013), which measures grammatical sensitivity or linguistic analytic ability (LAA).  One of the subcomponents of aptitude that has received more attention is memory.  Early interpretations of memory (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968) considered short-term memory (STM) a storage mechanism through which information was transferred to long-term memory by means of rehearsal.  Baddeley and Hitch (1974) later argued that STM should be replaced with working memory (WM), a system concerned not only with storage but also with active processing.  Skehan (2002) and Robinson (2005a) suggested expanding the traditional view of aptitude by integrating WM measures into “a much broader battery of aptitude subtests than operationalized in MLAT and other traditional tests” (Robinson 2005a, p.  51).  One of the most acknowledged models of WM is the multiple-component model developed by Baddeley and Hitch (1974) and later modiﬁed by Baddeley (2000), which views WM as a system consisting of (a) a central executive, to control and regulate attention.  (b) a phonological loop, involved in retaining verbal information in a temporary store.  (c) a visuospatial sketch pad, which maintains visual or spatial information.  and (d) an episodic buffer, a temporary storage system that integrates the information processed in the other subsystems and long-term memory. 