I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Books have long been recognized as a source of input for children learning language in cultures with widespread literacy.  Investigations into the relationship between books and language development have typically been of two types.  One is research showing a relationship between frequency of children’s book experiences and broad measures of language development such as literacy or preliteracy skills (see Bus, van IJzendoorn & Pellegrini, , for a review) or vocabulary size (e. g.  Lyytinen, Laasko & Poikkeus, .  Raikes et al. , .  see Fletcher & Reese, , for a review).  Second are studies examining the occurrence of specific linguistic elements in children’s books, trying to link them directly to knowledge.  for instance, there are recent studies showing that children’s books contain more complex sentence structures than naturalistic spoken input (Cameron-Faulkner & Noble, ), and that there exists a correlation between text exposure and the production of more complex syntactic structures (Montag & MacDonald, ).  This latter kind of investigation ultimately relies on knowing the actual books children are being read.  However, examinations of children’s books have not typically been done with access to this information.  Instead, proxies for this information have been used in selecting the books for examination.  Cameron-Faulkner and Noble (), for instance, used sales information to select books for examination, while Montag and MacDonald () analyzed corpus data (specifically, the Corpus of Contemporary American English, Davies, –).  Although this way of selecting text for analysis can tell us a great deal about the overall nature of the language that is generally contained in children’s books, it is difficult to make any more specific claims, given that the books that children have are not necessarily the books that they are read.  One must also take into account the fact that children’s books, even ones targeted to the same age range, can differ in the amount and nature of text they contain, sometimes in ways which are predictable due to genre.  For instance, storybooks contain complete sentences, whereas word books are often pictures accompanied by single words labelling the pictures, and storybooks expose children to culturally normative narrative structures whereas information books may not.  Moreover, genre differences carry with them interactional implications that can further affect input (Nyhout & O’Neill, .  cf.  Leech & Rowe, ).  For instance, there is evidence that there is more variability in what parents say when reading vocabulary-focused books as compared to storybooks (Price, Van Kleeck & Huberty, ).  Thus, having a more accurate picture of the books children are being read would be useful for researchers interested in the potential role of bookreading activities in language development.  To this end we conducted an Internet survey of parents and caregivers, asking about the English-language books they frequently read to their children.  Because of the linguistic features we are ultimately interested in examining in books (the ultimate reason we wanted this information), the survey targeted people reading to children aged – months, an age group we know relatively little about in terms of bookreading (Fletcher & Reese, ).  This short notice is a description of the resulting dataset, which is available to researchers in multiple formats at the following web-address.  <http. //linguistics. ubc. ca/ubc-ibdb/>, or by request from the first author.  It is hosted by the Department of Linguistics at the University of British Columbia and there is a commitment to retain the link permanently.  We ask that people cite this report when using the database.  <Middle> DESCRIPTION OF THE DATABASE.  Data collection.  The survey was conducted beginning in January of  through to June of .  The invitation to participate was posted on a lab website, which described the study briefly and contained a link to the actual survey at FluidSurveys. com.  (FluidSurveys is a Canadian company, and all their data are hosted at a site in Canada, in accordance with the requirements of our IRB. ) The study was described as being about children’s books in English for parents and caregivers of children ages – months.  It did not specifically mention picture books.  The link to the lab webpage was circulated via the lab’s Twitter account, and from there it was recirculated via Twitter and Facebook by other Twitter and Facebook users.  Although many of the initial recirculaters were friends and family, the invitation was also recirculated by people we did not know, including more generic Twitter accounts (i. e.  accounts not associated with a specific person’s name).  Overview of survey questions.  The survey first asked participants to list the five books they currently most frequently read to their child.  There was another place where the respondent could list any other books they frequently read to their child.  Then the information about the five most frequently read books was used to populate further questions asking about their reading habits for each book.  Specifically, participants were asked how much they stick to the text on the page versus say things not written in the book.  They provided this additional information (about reading habits) for each of the five most frequently read books individually.  They did not provide this additional information for any extra books they listed.  Participants were also asked questions about the child’s age (in -month increments), sex, gestational status (full-term or not), and about the occurrence of any hearing, language, or cognitive diagnoses.  (We use the term sex here as a child’s primary sexual characteristics are more apparent than their gender at this age. ) We also asked about the child’s language production (which might be expected to influence book choices) to get a very general sense of the child’s level of language development.  Specifically we asked whether the child was (i) producing any words, (ii) producing more than ten understandable words, (iii) producing any two-word sequences, and (iv) producing any sequences of more than three words.  The four language production questions were in a Y/N format.  We also asked questions about the respondent. 