INTRODUCTION.  The acquisition and processing of nouns and verbs, two word categories that differ both syntactically (i. e. , for their grammatical role) and conceptually (denoting different entities.  objects and actions), has received much attention recently.  There is empirical evidence that verbs and nouns are two cognitively distinct word categories, involving different kinds of representations and processing demands.  Studies of children’s early lexical development have shown evidence of a gap in the acquisition of nouns and verbs, with nouns being acquired earlier than verbs in some languages (English, French, German, and Italian.  Bassano, .  Bates et al. , .  Gentner, .  Gentner & Boroditsky, .  MacNamara, .  Nelson, ), and the opposite pattern being true in others (Mandarin Chinese and Korean.  Choi & Gopnick, .  Tardif, ), suggesting that children’s processing of nouns and verbs entails different cognitive demands.  The present study adds to this line of research by exploring the lexical and conceptual/semantic variables contributing to object and action naming skills in three- and five-year-old Italian children.  There is extensive evidence that the vocabulary of very young children speaking English, German, and Italian includes mainly nouns, with verbs present in a more restricted number (Bassano, .  Bates et al. , .  Caselli et al. , .  Klassert, Gagarina, & Kauschke, .  Sheng & McGregor, ).  This phenomenon is labelled ‘noun bias’ (Bassano, .  Klassert et al. , ).  Gentner (, , ) was among the first to propose this idea, named the NATURAL PARTITIONS hypothesis, on the basis of findings that most words in the early lexicon are nouns.  The dominant idea is that nouns learned by young children correspond to “highly cohesive collections of percepts that are universally conceptualized as objects” and consequently “lexicalized as nouns” in most languages.  The complementary RELATIONAL RELATIVITY hypothesis in Gentner’s conceptualization states that in order to make the correspondence between the linguistic verb and its meaning there is more variability in the way relations are expressed within and across languages (Gentner & Boroditsky, ).  For example, the act of making a piece of clothing from wool or cotton with long needles or a machine is lexicalized as a single verb in English (to knit) and as a phrase in Italian (lavorare a maglia, literally ‘to work at knitting’).  In contrast, the objects used to knit are lexicalized by a single noun in both languages.  needles in English and ferri in Italian.  More generally, the noun bias reflects the fact that nouns (i) are conceptually simpler than verbs, and often refer to NATURAL categories.  (ii) are less dependent on context for interpretation.  and (iii) mostly refer to stable entities (‘chair’, ‘doll’) in the communicative context, as opposed to verbs, which refer to events (‘pass’, ‘disappear’), or relations between objects and agents (‘give’, ‘take’).  For this reason, objects are believed to be easier to identify and represent for a child than actions.  A complementary and more comprehensive view of the word learning process, the EMERGENTIST COALITION model holds that an important factor in learning nouns and verbs, besides the difficulty of mapping language to the world, is the ability to use linguistic information, and to understand the social intent of a speaker (Golinkoff & Hirsh-Pasek, , .  Maguire, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, ).  Children predominantly use perceptual information first to learn words.  subsequently, they can use social–linguistic cues which can support the learning of more difficult terms requiring a complex pattern of relations between multiple entities, rather than a single, perceptually salient object (Brandone, Pence, Golinkoff, & Hirsh-Pasek, ).  In this theory, not all nouns are necessarily learned early and not all verbs are learned late.  factors like figure–ground relation, concreteness, imageability, and the ease of being distinguished from other elements in the context may be important predictors of learning nouns and verbs.  A different perspective is taken by those who note that if conceptual/ semantic complexity and context dependency were the only determinants of the noun–verb difference, the noun advantage in acquisition should be found in both comprehension and production, while in fact it is more marked in production (Bassano, .  Sandhofer, Smith, & Luo, ).  These authors argued that the noun advantage might be a consequence of linguistic characteristics of nouns and verbs.  There is some empirical evidence in support of this hypothesis.  Bassano (), for example, found that in French-speaking children, the noun–verb gap in the early development of language production was explained by grammatical aspects of verbs and nouns.  In two-year-old French-speaking children, verb grammaticalization, or the ability to properly use the grammatical features of verbs, assessed through use of inflections and auxiliaries, lagged behind noun grammaticalization, assessed through use of the determiner.  As noted, children learning Korean and Mandarin Chinese typically show a developmental pattern opposite to that observed for French, English, and German, with verb naming developing earlier than noun naming (Choi & Gopnick, .  Tardif, ), while in Cantonese children no advantage for nouns over verbs was found (Masterson et al. , ).  All these data would support the idea of an involvement of language-specific factors in the noun–verb developmental gap.  Among the language-specific dimensions that are believed to affect real-time word learning or production are the grammatical and syntactic structures of the language.  For example, in so-called verb-friendly languages like Mandarin or Korean, noun phrases can be dropped from the sentence.  As a consequence, nouns are less frequent in these languages than in noun-friendly languages like English, where nouns are typically explicit (Waxman, Fu, Arunachalam, Leddon, Geraghty, & Song, ).  As noted, variability across languages seems higher where verbs, not nouns, are concerned.  In a series of experiments with monolingual -month-old children acquiring different languages (i. e. , English, Mandarin, and Korean), Waxman and collaborators (Arunachalam, Leddon, Song, Lee, & Waxman, .  Arunachalam & Waxman, .  Leddon, Arunachalam, Waxman, Fu, Gong, & Wang, ) found that performance in verb learning was more variable than performance in noun learning across languages, and that it reflected the specific characteristics of the language learned, in particular its syntactic structures.  In languages like English, richer linguistic (syntactic) contexts (full noun phrases) are necessary to learn a verb in comparison to a noun (Arunachalam et al. , .  Arunachalam & Waxman, ).  But in languages where noun phrases can be dropped from sentences, like Korean, children typically need less explicit and sparser linguistic contexts to learn a verb (Arunachalam et al. , ).  At the lexical level, morphological complexity (the use of inflected forms for a noun or verb to express a concept) is also important (Bates et al. , ).  When different inflected forms of a word exist, these may provide important information to identify the subject argument, but they can also compete during word retrieval.  For example, D’Amico, Devescovi, and Bates () found that five- to six-year-old Italian children were affected by gender inflection in object naming.  Naming agreement was greater when the target word was masculine (the default gender in Italian) than feminine (less frequent word types).  On the other hand, in verb-friendly languages that have a reduced morphology, like Mandarin, the lack of inflections may make it difficult for the child to distinguish nouns from verbs (Imai et al. , ).  In the present study we investigated the contribution of lexical (word frequency, length) and conceptual/semantic (imageability, familiarity) factors to object and action naming in three- and five-year-old Italian children.  Italian linguistic structure is characterized by a complex morphology.  Italian verbs, in particular, have a much richer inflectional morphology than English, with different suffixes for tense, aspect, person, number, gender, and mood, and nouns are inflected for person, number, and gender.  In Italian, a pro-drop language (Rizzi, ), noun phrases (specifically, subject pronouns) can be dropped from the sentence when the context allows disambiguation (Bates et al. , ).  Therefore, verbs might potentially be more frequent.  Agreement marking of Italian verbs on person, gender, and number allows for dropping the subject.  As a consequence of subject-dropping, verbs are more likely in the salient initial position.  Thus, both because of the pro-drop characteristics, and because of the verb position in sentences, verbs should be more salient in Italian than English, and the prediction could be made that verbs would appear before nouns in Italian children’s development.  In contrast to this prediction, studies describing the spontaneous speech of young Italian children (Caselli et al. , .  Tardif, Shatz, & Naigles, ) showed a noun bias.  This results in an apparent contradiction.  that is, Italian is more similar to Mandarin than English in certain aspects of linguistic structure, but young children’s speech shows a noun bias for Italian and English and a verb bias for Mandarin.  Tardif et al.  () specifically explored the verb–noun difference in Mandarin, English, and Italian adult speech directed to children and in the children’s spontaneous speech.  Tardif et al. ’s study showed that nouns were more frequent than verbs in Italian adult speech in terms of types, and there was no difference between Italian and English for token frequency, but verb tokens were more frequent than nouns in all three languages.  Moreover, considering the two more salient positions in the sentence, beginning and end, verbs were more frequent at the beginning of sentences in all three languages.  In the final position, however, nouns were more frequent than verbs in English, while in Mandarin the probability of a verb ending a sentence was higher than for a noun.  In Italian the difference was not significant.  Although morphological marking appears to be more complex for verbs than for nouns in both English and Italian, there was a significantly greater variation in the latter, suggesting a greater morphological complexity for Italian verbs than nouns, as anticipated.  In Mandarin the trend was the opposite, with greater morphological variation for nouns than for verbs.  Finally, subjects were dropped in a high proportion of Italian and Mandarin utterances, in contrast to English.  In particular, Italian allowed the omission of both nouns and pronouns, due to important information coming from the inflectional morphology of verbs, specifying person and number.  Tardif et al. ’s conclusion was that Italian speech input patterns with English for some aspects of linguistic structure, and with Mandarin for other aspects.  However, Italian-speaking children “hear an overall pattern of linguistic input that looks more like English than like Mandarin” (Tardif et al. , , p.  ).  This might explain why two-year-old Italian children show a preponderance of nouns in their vocabulary.  Given the complexity of the linguistic structure of Italian, however, this kind of distribution might vary when children grow older and their ability to interpret thematic and pragmatic roles in sentences, as specified by verbs, increase.  For example, subject dropping may require a larger extent of inferential processing for the mapping between the omitted subject and the referent, and for the identification of (one of) the verb’s argument(s).  This capacity might require time to develop, and be fully efficient only in older children, not in two-year-olds (but see Arunachalam et al. , .  Arunachalam & Waxman, ).  Existing studies on the noun–verb difference across different languages investigated Italian infants in indirect studies, through parental report (Bornstein et al. , .  Caselli et al. , ), while an empirical study is missing.  Thus, in the present study we investigated older children, threeand five-year-olds, and verified whether the noun bias found in younger children through parental report still remains in older children.  As noted, investigations through parental report ensure ecological validity, but largely limit the comparability of findings across languages, as named objects and actions vary across language samples, depending on the specific characteristics of the context of the observations.  To overcome these limits, some researchers have more recently used picture naming tasks (Bates et al. , .  D’Amico et al. , .  Kambanaros, Grohmann, & Michaelides, .  Masterson et al. , ).  Picture naming allows for a more controlled assessment (and comparison) of children’s naming skills, as both the context (the task) and the stimuli to be named are the same for all children.  Masterson et al.  () tested three- and five-year-old English-speaking children with a picture naming task, representing objects and actions, and investigated the effect of several lexical variables on both accuracy and latencies in naming a picture.  Pictures were line drawings of objects and actions, matched for AoA (Age of Acquisition) and spoken frequency, not for imageability, visual complexity, and length of name.  AoA is considered critical in naming tasks, since it has been demonstrated that words learned earlier are retrieved faster (e. g. , Brysbaert & Ghyselinck, .  Carroll & White, .  Gerhand & Barry, .  Morrison & Ellis, .  Navarrete, Scaltritti, Mulatti, & Peressotti, .  Zevin & Seidenberg, , ) and are less prone to retrieval failures (Navarrete, Pastore, Valentini, & Peressotti, ).  Imageability is related to the semantic aspects of the concept to be named.  If the gap between object and action naming is due to semantic factors, imageability should correlate closely with the children’s performance in these tasks and explain a significant part of the object and action naming difference.  Frequency and length, by contrast, can be considered lexical variables, which affect object and action naming similarly.  In their first experiment, Masterson et al. , only measured accuracy, and they found higher accuracy for nouns than for verbs only for three-year-old children, who were overall less accurate than five-year-olds.  The main predictors of accuracy for three-year-olds were imageability for both actions and objects.  Moreover, they found that word length and visual complexity explained part of the variance in naming accuracy for objects, and spoken frequency explained naming accuracy for actions.  For five-year-olds, significant predictors were spoken frequency for actions, imageability for objects, and word length for both objects and actions.  AoA was not included in the regression analysis, but nouns and verbs were matched for it, while they were not for the other variables.  In a second experiment, Masterson et al.  () also collected latencies for five-year-old English-speaking children, as a more sensitive measure to investigate the action–object difference, given that this difference did not emerge in the error analysis.  Indeed, they found a significant advantage in terms of naming latencies for objects compared to actions.  The regression analysis showed a pattern similar to that of Experiment .  Imageability was the strongest predictor for objects in both error and latencies analyses.  In the latter, visual complexity was also significant.  For actions, no variable predicted latencies, while errors were predicted by frequency and length.  Overall, the study confirmed that English-speaking children acquired action names later than object names, and this trend was still present in five-year-olds.  Moreover, imageability and spoken frequency were the more robust predictors, with the first affecting objects and the latter only actions.  In fact, the influence of spoken frequency was not stable in the two experiments in Masterson et al. , although it showed a stronger effect on actions.  Masterson et al.  () also examined different categories of errors committed by children for the two types of stimuli.  They classified each error type according to three hyper-categories.  semantic, visual, and other.  They did not find any substantial difference between action and objects in the three-year-olds, who tended to commit more omission errors, while five-year-olds made more semantic errors for actions (‘weaving–knitting’) than for objects, and more omission errors for objects than for actions.  Overall, the authors’ interpretation of the results was that the semantic representation of objects and actions differ.  In particular, the greater influence of imageability for objects than for verbs that they found in their data would be due to the greater availability of objects in the sensory experience of children, which in turn would lead to a more detailed semantic representation for objects.  In contrast, the verbs’ semantic and thematic representation is quite heterogeneous, thus making it possible for children to acquire verbs only through repeated exposures.  This would explain the significant effect of the predictor spoken frequency on verb acquisition This interpretation is in line with the idea that actions are conceptually more complex, an idea shared by many researchers in the field, as mentioned above.  As noted, this complexity may be due to different causes, but primarily to the fact that actions involve understanding scenes and episodes, and are more likely to require inferential reasoning.  Moreover, object recognition is based on the shape of the object and on a static view (Biederman, .  Humphreys, Riddoch, & Quinlan, ), while the interpretation of an action requires the involvement of visual motion, even if it is represented statically (den Ouden, Fix, Parrish, & Thompson, ).  From a developmental point of view it is important to point out that concepts may be acquired before their corresponding names, and that their acquisition is not necessarily all or none.  Children may have acquired partial representations of a concept, and may not be able to name it at some point, consistent with the more marked noun advantage in production (Bassano, .  Sandhofer et al. , ).  This idea is further supported by evidence that children are extremely sensitive to cues from social–pragmatic contexts (Arunachalam et al. , ).  The meaning of words, either nouns or verbs, can be considered as given by specific interconnections between the verbal label and the underlying concept.  Thus, it is interesting to understand the extent to which the underlying concept has been at least partially grasped when actions and objects are not named correctly.  We would expect that young children would not be able to name correctly some words that are not presently in their lexical repertoire, but may nonetheless have acquired at least a partial knowledge of their meanings.  In the light of the presumed greater semantic– conceptual complexity of actions, we expected children’s acquisition of action labels to lag behind that of objects.  In the present study we investigated the acquisition of actions and objects in three- and five-year-old Italian children with a selection of pictures from the Masterson et al. ’s () corpus.  Given that two-year-olds show a noun bias, we might expect a bias in this direction to still be present in older (three- and five-year-old) children, in particular if the noun advantage is due to the semantic–conceptual representation.  In contrast, as the linguistic structure of the language should be completely acquired in five-year-olds, if this is responsible for the noun bias in two-year-olds it should have less influence on older children, and so we would expect no, or a smaller, noun bias in the latter.  We also examined the effect of some predictors investigated in several studies that affected naming performance in adults and children.  In particular, among these we included imageability, AoA, and visual complexity of pictures, as they are highly correlated with picture naming performance (D’Amico et al. , .  Masterson et al. , .  Szekely et al. , ).  AoA was measured subjectively, but subjective and objective measures correlate highly (e. g. , Ferrand et al. , .  Lotto, Surian, & Job, .  Morrison, Chappell, & Ellis, ).  We included familiarity as a measure of the frequency with which children experienced concepts for actions and objects.  We also included an estimate of spoken frequency, drawn from texts written by children, as spoken frequency estimates for children were not available for Italian.  We included length in phonemes, as it might be important for the production phase of naming.  Finally, we carried out a qualitative analysis of errors in order to see whether a different pattern emerged for objects and actions.  In particular, in order to see if the difficulty in acquiring verbs is dependent on the complexity of their conceptual representations or on a difficulty in acquiring and using the words in spoken language, we investigated if the types of errors in object and action naming would reveal a problem at the semantic or at the lexical level.  For example, the incorrectly produced word might be a coordinate, or superordinate, of the target.  In this case, one may plausibly conclude that the underlying semantic representation is not correctly specified, lacking some critical attribute differentiating an exemplar from another of the same category.  On the other hand, if the child does not come up with the target word, but with a definition of the meaning of the word, as exemplified, for example, by a circumlocution, then it may be plausible to conclude that the semantic–conceptual representation has been to some extent acquired, but not the corresponding verbal label.  In sum, although some aspects of the linguistic structure of Italian may favour verbs, existing studies attested a noun bias in very young children (e. g. , Caselli et al. , .  Tardif et al. , ).  Perhaps this bias may change when linguistic ability is more mature.  to this end, in the present study we investigated action and object picture naming in three- and five-year-olds.  We also examined lexical and semantic variables and their effects on the noun–verb difference, measured by accuracy and latencies in the picture naming task. 