Human communication involves linguistic knowledge (grammar, lexicon, and sound structure), as well as knowledge about the context within which it is used (what can be inferred about the speaker’s intentions, etc. ).  This latter type of knowledge, pragmatics, has received considerable attention in studies on autism, and impairment in this domain is considered a core feature of autism spectrum disorder (ASD.  see Baron-Cohen, 1988.  Boucher, 2003).  By contrast, formal aspects of language (those concerning sound, word, and sentence structure) have been much less investigated in ASD, especially in languages other than English.  This is despite consensus among scholars regarding the existence of frequent formal language impairment in children with ASD (for overviews, see Boucher, 2012.  Eigsti, de Marchena, Schuh, & Kelley, 2011.  and Groen, Zwiers, Van der Gaag, & Buitelaar, 2008), though rates and underlying nature of this impairment have been understudied.  Recent work has brought this issue to the forefront in the context of the question of whether the language difﬁculties observed in some children with ASD are similar to those found in children with speciﬁc language impairment (SLI.  for a review, see Williams, Botting, & Boucher, 2008). 1 Moreover, it has been suggested that an “inverse” production–comprehension dissociation characterizes language in children with ASD, with comprehension difﬁculties overshadowing production difﬁculties (for a review, see Boucher, 2012), and persistence of comprehension problems constituting a signiﬁcant difference with SLI (Rutter, Mawhood, & Howlin, 1992), though the validity of this characterization remains unclear (Kwok, Brown, Smyth, & Cardy, 2015).  This paper aims to contribute to this inquiry with a study comparing children with ASD to children with SLI on alternative ways of forming wh-questions in French.  Our goal was to determine if production and comprehension of wh-questions show the same patterns of relative avoidance/preference in production and difﬁculty in comprehension in these two populations.  LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT IN ASD AND SLI.  According to the International Classiﬁcation of Diseases, 10th edition (ICD-10.  World Health Organization, 2010), both ASD and SLI are disorders of psychological development.  ASD is characterized by impaired communication and social interactions and by restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped behavior (see DSM-5.  American Psychiatric Association, 2013).  A large proportion of children with ASD also have intellectual deﬁcits.  Regarding language skills, there is considerable variation among children with ASD.  In addition to the well-known pragmatic difﬁculties experienced by children with ASD, some children also experience varying degrees of semantic, morphosyntactic, and/or phonological impairment (Lord, Risi, & Pickles, 2004.  Tager-Flusberg, 2006.  Wilkinson, 1998).  SLI is a disorder affecting language in the absence of any primary disorder such as intellectual disability, auditory/perceptual impairment, or obvious neurological dysfunction.  One language domain particularly affected in children with SLI is morphosyntax (Leonard, 2014).  Because morphosyntax may also be impaired in children with ASD, the question arises as to the extent, the nature, and the implications of the intersection between ASD and SLI (see Bishop, 2010.  Kjelgaard & Tager-Flusberg, 2001.  Tager-Flusberg, 2004, 2006.  Tomblin, 2011).  ASD-SLI studies that have sought to elucidate these questions through direct, comparative investigation of these two populations are relatively few in number.  These began with Bartak, Rutter, and Cox’s (1975) study, and the large clinical cohort studies undertaken by Allen and Rapin (1992), Rapin (1996), and Tuchman, Rapin, and Shinnar (1991.  for an overview and an integrative analysis of these, see also Rapin & Dunn, 2003).  These have been followed by a dozen other, smaller studies published in the last decade, which have also focused on English-speaking children (Leyfer, Tager-Flusberg, Dowd, Tomblin, & Folstein, 2008.  Lloyd, Paintin, & Botting, 2006.  Loucas et al. , 2008, 2010, 2013.  Pickles et al. , 2009.  Whitehouse, Barry, & Bishop, 2008.  Williams, Payne, & Marshall, 2013), with few exceptions (Demouy et al. , 2011.  Durrleman & Delage, 2016.  Geurts & Embrechts, 2008.  Zebib, Tuller, Prévost, & Morin, 2013).  Ultimately, identifying the nature of language deﬁcits that some children with ASD have could lead to the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc subgroups of children with autism, which in turn would contribute to better understanding of autism and the development of appropriate care.  The principal objective of this paper is to explore aspects of structural language in children with ASD in both production and comprehension, as part of the overarching goal of documenting language proﬁles in these children.  It has often been reported that children with ASD have higher abilities in expression than in reception (Boucher, 2003, 2012.  Charman et al. , 2003.  Lloyd et al. , 2006.  Rutter et al. , 1992), and these reports echo observations frequently made by clinicians.  In a recent review, Kwok et al.  (2015) found that the (few) studies directly comparing receptive/expressive modalities did not all show an advantage for production over reception, with some showing the opposite dissociation, and some no dissociation at all.  Furthermore, their meta-analysis of 74 studies reporting on either receptive or expressive language found no evidence for a typical expression-over-reception pattern in children with ASD.  This was true for studies of vocabulary, as well as for studies that included measures of global language ability.  However, Kwok et al.  underlined several important lacuna in the literature, concluding that the number of studies reporting measures of structural language made it impossible for them to run a separate analysis for this domain, and thus to determine whether there might be some kind of receptive–expressive dissociation for this aspect of language.  One of the major conclusions for their study was the need for further exploration of grammar and syntax.  Moreover, Kwok et al.  (2015) found that the participants in the extant literature did not form a representative sample, and speciﬁcally that low-functioning children were underrepresented in studies of children after age 6, making it probable, in their view, that language abilities in school-age children and youth might be overestimated.  The underlying assumption here is that it is reasonable to imagine that language should be more affected in children with ASD who have intellectual disability than in those who do not, and perhaps comprehension might be even more affected in children with this proﬁle.  If this is the case, then potential receptive–expressive language gaps may not have been adequately explored in these children.  It might further be supposed that, more generally, performance on speciﬁc aspects of language could be more affected by nonverbal ability.  A few studies have reported on difﬁculties in comprehension of particular morphosyntactic constructions, such as object relative clauses (Durrlemann & Zafferey, 2013), accusative clitics (Terzi, Marinis, Kotsopoulou, & Konstantinos, 2014), passives (Perovic, Modyanova, Hanson, Nelson, & Wexler, 2007.  Terzi et al. , 2014), and binding (Perovic, Modyanovs, & Wexler, 2013a, 2013b).  However, these did not all include children from the entire autism spectrum (some only included highfunctioning children), which suggests that the question of the relationship between nonverbal ability and language comprehension/language performance in ASD is still very much an open, empirical question.  The relationship between language skills and cognitive development in ASD has received attention in the literature.  Some studies suggest that children with ASD have language skills similar to typically or atypically developing children of the same cognitive level (Howlin, 1984.  Tager-Flusberg et al. , 1990).  others argue that linguistic deﬁcits in children with ASD may be speciﬁc, independent of their nonverbal ability (Eigsti, Bennetto, & Dadlani, 2007.  Kjelgaard & Tager-Flusberg, 2001.  Perovic et al. , 2013b).  These latter studies appear to go in the same direction as studies investigating SLI, which is, by deﬁnition, independent of nonverbal IQ, and so-called nonspeciﬁc language impairment, children with language impairment and low cognition, but no other developmental disability (see Rice, 2016, for recent discussion).  The question of a possible overlap between SLI and ASD is in this way tightly connected to the issue of whether low nonverbal IQ can be regarded as “the driver for language impairments in children” (Rice, 2016).  ASDSLI comparative studies differ in how this question is approached.  Some studies have focused on whether there are children with ASD who resemble children with SLI in having both normal nonverbal IQ and impaired structural language (Geurts & Embrechts, 2008.  Leyfer et al. , 2008.  Loucas et al. , 2008, 2010, 2013.  Riches, Loucas, Baird, Charman, & Simonoff, 2010, 2011.  Whitehouse et al. , 2008.  Williams, Payne, & Marshall, 2013).  Others have sought to document language proﬁles in verbal children with ASD, regardless of nonverbal cognitive proﬁles and to explore the incidence of structural language impairment more widely (Demouy et al. , 2011.  Durrleman & Delage, 2016.  Lloyd et al. , 2006.  Pickles et al. , 2009.  Rapin 1996.  Rey, Tardif, Delahaie, Thomas, & Massion, 2001.  Tuchman et al. , 1991).  We will be pursuing this second approach, bearing in mind, however, the possible inﬂuence of nonverbal ability, which will be directly addressed, as will the question of how ASD language proﬁles might best be explored.  SYNTACTIC COMPLEXITY AND LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT.  WH-QUESTIONS IN FRENCH.  In this paper, we address the question of the nature of structural language impairment, and, more speciﬁcally, of the reported receptive disadvantage in verbal children with ASD, by focusing on the complexity of syntactic computation in children with ASD.  Recent research shows that both typical and atypical language development is constrained by computational complexity, with more complex constructions emerging later than constructions involving less complexity (Chillier et al. , 2001.  Friedmann, Belletti, & Rizzi, 2009.  Hamman, Tuller, Monjauze, Delage, & Henry, 2007.  Jakubowicz & Nash, 2001.  van der Lely, 2005).  Among proposals that have aimed at characterizing particular aspects of complexity, Jakubowicz’s (2011) computational complexity hypothesis postulated that accumulation of the operations involved in linguistic computation, in particular internal merge and external merge, is quite challenging for young children and individuals with language pathology.  We focus in this study on this speciﬁc aspect of computational complexity.  Children may in effect avoid a complex structure by producing an alternative sentence involving fewer operations, or by adopting compensatory strategies, such as omission or substitution, which reduce the computational complexity of a derivation.  Computational complexity may also impact on comprehension.  A clear example is that of object relative clauses, which have been argued to involve a high degree of complexity, and are exceedingly difﬁcult for young children and for children with SLI, yielding subject relative interpretations, in comprehension, and, in production, alternative structures that are simpler, though sometimes inappropriate or ungrammatical (Friedmann et al. , 2009).  Wh-questions are a particularly useful area of French syntax for assessing computational complexity and its impact on language development, in that several grammatical constructions varying in complexity are available, from wh–in situ to wh-fronting with V-to-I movement followed by I-to-C movement (which we refer to by the traditional term subject/verb inversion), some of which are illustrated in (1), where wh-constructions are listed according to increasing complexity, and which are all ways of asking a question about the object of the verb push. 2 In (1a), the object wh-word qui “who” follows the verb pousses “push,” the socalled in situ position.  This matches the canonical verb–object order in French.  In contrast, the sentences in (1b)–(1e) all display the object wh-word qui in a preverbal position, which renders them more complex than the wh–in situ strategy in (1a).  Speciﬁcally, it is assumed that the wh-word moves from its base-generated postverbal position via internal merge to a higher position in the structure of the sentence (Chomsky, 1995). 3 A dependency relation is therefore established between the wh-word and its base-generated position, and it is precisely this kind of relationship that children with SLI are assumed to have difﬁculties with (see, e. g. , van der Lely, 2005).  Under this assumption, wh-questions with wh-fronting and subject/verb inversion (which involves a subject clitic), as in (1f), or wh-fronting and stylistic inversion (which involves a full lexical subject DP), as in (1g), represent the most complex types since they involve two internal merge operations.  that of the wh-word to the front of the sentence as well as that involved in the noncanonical order of the verb with respect to its subject.  I-to-C in the case of subject/verb inversion and overt movement of the subject to a position higher than SpecVP in the case of stylistic inversion (see Kayne & Pollock, 2001).  In these sentences, two dependency relationships must be established, which is particularly difﬁcult for children with SLI (see van der Lely, 2005).  As to (1b) and (1c), both involve wh-fronting, but (1c) is more complex than (1b) since it also includes external merge of a question marker est-ce que (ESK.  also part of the derivation of (1g)).  Jakubowicz (2011) argued that clefts ((1d)–(1e)) are more complex, as they entail both external merge (of the wh-word in the matrix clause) and internal merge (of an empty operator, identiﬁed by the overt wh-word).  Firthermore, (1e) includes a cleft construction and movement of the clefted wh-word, which makes it more complex than (1d).  Some of the interrogative strategies, wh–in situ, plain wh-fronting, and whfronting with ESK, are very frequent in spoken French, while wh-fronting with subject/verb inversion is much rarer (see Coveney, 1996.  Quillard, 2000, for some quantitative ﬁndings), but not altogether absent from the input received by children (see Prévost, Tuller, Galloux, & Barthez, in press).  In particular, it is part of highfrequency ﬁxed expressions (e. g. , Que veux-tu.  “What do you want. ”) and can be found in literature for children.  It is also associated with a more formal register, in contrast to the other strategies that are more neutral (although they can occur in formal contexts.  see Coveney, 1996.  Quillard, 2000).  Several studies on the development of wh-questions in French by typically developing (TD) children and children and adolescents with SLI (aged 3 years, 10 months [3. 10] to 14. 0) have shown that wh–in situ is largely favored in the earliest stages of acquisition, be it in spontaneous production or elicited production.  In contrast, wh-fronting with subject/verb inversion is extremely rare in the production data of young children and children with SLI (for typical development, see Hamann, 2006.  Hulk, 1996.  Hulk & Zuckerman, 2000.  Plunkett, 1999.  Strik, 2007.  for SLI, see Hamann, 2006.  Jakubowicz, 2011).  Studies on the comprehension of wh-questions in French are quite rare, and their objective has not been to compare performance across wh-strategies.  For instance, Plunkett (2010) looked at object versus subject wh-questions and showed, in different experiments, that object wh-questions with wh–in situ and with wh-fronting + ESK were well understood.  In patients suffering from agrammatic aphasia, however, van der Meulen (2004) showed that object questions with wh–in situ were signiﬁcantly better understood than questions involving wh-fronting.  Studies looking at both production and comprehension of other complex structures in French have generally reported low rates of production despite good comprehension, including in children with SLI.  Such is the case of object clitics, which appear in a (noncanonical) preverbal position in French (e. g. , Pierre la pousse “Peter her pushes”.  Grüter, 2005.  Jakubowicz, Nash, Rigaut, & Giraud, 1998.  see Jakubowicz & Tuller, 2008, for review of other such cases).  Some studies suggest that complex sentences are problematic for children with ASD.  For instance, Condouris, Meyer, and Tager-Flusberg (2003) found that interrogatives are affected in autism.  In an analysis of spontaneous speech of 44 individuals with ASD (mean age = 7. 3 and normal and impaired nonverbal IQ), they found low scores on the question/negation subscale of the Index of Productive Syntax, a measure assessing the child’s emergent use of particular structures (Scarborough, 1990).  Durrleman and Zufferey (2009), analyzing production data from two high-functioning children with ASD (aged 3. 9 and 5. 8), argue that complex structures are affected by truncation, namely, the top layers of the structural representations are not systematically projected (Rizzi, 2000).  In a study speciﬁcally investigating the effect of complexity in language performance, Riches et al.  (2010) reported that both high-functioning adolescents with ASD and language impairment (mean age = 14. 8, n = 16) and adolescents with SLI (mean age = 15. 3, n = 14) were affected by complexity, but more so in the latter.  Although individuals with ASD and individuals with SLI tended to make more errors than age-matched TD adolescents in the production of subject and object relative clauses, individuals with SLI struggled even more than individuals with ASD on object relative clauses (deemed to be more complex).  Our goal in the study presented here was to explore the issue of ASD-SLI similarities/differences by focusing on a comparison of production and comprehension of structures involving varying degrees of computational complexity.  We sought to provide concrete answers to the following speciﬁc questions.  (2) a.  Do children with ASD resemble children with SLI in avoiding complex strategies when they produce wh-questions.  Are favored wh-strategies and error types similar or different in the two groups.  b.  Are children with ASD sensitive to complexity in their comprehension of whquestions like children with SLI are.  Are the same types of questions difﬁcult/easy to understand in the two groups.  c.  Does the nonverbal ability of children with ASD correlate with their performance on the production and/or comprehension of wh-questions, with lower levels corresponding to greater difﬁculty with complex wh-questions.  <Middle> GENERAL METHOD.  Participants.  Twenty verbal children with ASD aged 6. 3 to 12. 9 (M = 8. 7, SD = 1. 9) and 20 age-matched children with SLI (range = 6. 5–11. 2, M = 8. 7, SD = 1. 8) were recruited from medical records of specialized sections of French hospitals for this study (see Appendix A for a detailed presentation of these two groups, and Table 1 below for a summary).  All children with ASD had been diagnosed according to ICD-10 criteria via the Autism Diagnosis Interview—Revised (Lord, Rutter, & Le Couteur, 1994) and conﬁrmed by the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, module 2 or 3 (Lord, Rutter, DiLavore, & Risi, 1989). 4 This group was composed of 4 girls and 16 boys.  Although all the children had language (children who did not produce three-word utterances regularly were excluded), they differed in terms of verbal and nonverbal ability, as shown in the Appendix A. 5 Available nonverbal IQ scores, which came from different tests administered at time intervals ranging from a few months to several years prior to testing time, varied from 48 to 108.  In order to have comparable nonverbal scores, Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices (RPM.  Raven, Court, & Raven, 1986) was administered to all children.  Seven of the 20 children with ASD (6 boys, 1 girl) had scores below the ninth percentile, which corresponds to a standard score of 80, and were therefore considered low functioning (LF).  These 7 children were aged 6. 4 to 10. 2 (M = 8. 1, SD = 1. 5), compared to an age range of 6. 3 to 12. 9 (M = 8. 10, SD = 1. 10) for the 13 other children, who were high functioning (HF). 6 Performance on standardized tests assessing phonology (real-word repetition from Bilan informatisé de langage oral au Cycle III et au collège.  Khomsi, Khomsi, Parbeau-Guéno, & Pasquet, 2007), morphosyntax (sentence completion from Bilan informatisé de langage oral au Cycle III et au collège), and receptive vocabulary (Batterie d’évaluation du langage oral de l’enfant aphasique.  De Agostini et al. , 1998) showed that 6 children with ASD did not display severe language impairment (set at the –1. 65 SD threshold, a cutoff often used in clinical settings in France.  Ramus et al. , 2003) in any of the three domains tested.  This included 5 HF children and 1 LF child (see Appendix A).  Low scores were obtained by the rest of the children.  In particular, 10 of the 20 children had severe difﬁculties in both morphosyntax and phonology, while 4 had severe difﬁculties in one and moderate or no difﬁculties in the other.  (See Tuller et al. , 2017, for discussion of phonological impairment in ASD, its incidence, and its nature. ) Crossing performance on nonverbal and verbal standardized tests identiﬁed children in each of the logically possible proﬁles.  (a) children with HF autism and normal language abilities (n = 5), (b) children with HF autism and language impairment (n = 8), (c) children with LF autism and normal language abilities (n = 1), and (d) children with LF autism and language impairment (n = 6). 7 However, no signiﬁcant correlations were found between nonverbal and verbal performance in the ASD group (receptive vocabulary.  rs = . 171, p = . 485, df = 17.  morphosyntax.  rs = . 273, p = . 243, df = 18.  phonology.  rs = . 397, p = . 083, df = 18).  Throughout this paper, we will report on the performances of the ASD group as a whole, but also of particular subgroups.  The children with SLI were recruited from neuropediatric units of university teaching hospitals in France.  They all had had a conventional diagnosis based on severely impaired language performance on standardized language batteries commonly used by speech and language therapists in this country, in conjunction with usual exclusionary criteria, including intellectual disability (as measured by the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children [performance IQ < 80], or an equivalent evaluation).  The SLI group was composed of 12 boys and 8 girls (see Table 1 and Appendix A for details).  The children with SLI were administered the same standardized language tests as the children with ASD, as well as RPM.  All RPM scores were within norms, except in three cases (see Appendix A).  It was decided to nonetheless keep these children in the SLI group as they had obtained normal nonverbal ability scores during clinical assessment.  With respect to language, all children with SLI were severely impaired in at least morphosyntax or phonology, with 12 of 20 having severe difﬁculties in both domains.  In contrast, only 2 children had z scores below norms in receptive vocabulary.  This pattern of results, that is, mean z scores well below norms on phonology and morphosyntax, and only moderate difﬁculties in vocabulary, was similar to that observed in the ASD group. 8 Mann–Whitney tests showed no signiﬁcant difference between the ASD group and the SLI group on receptive vocabulary, U (38) = 156, p = . 242, and morphosyntax, U (39) = 135, p = . 081. 9 Regarding phonology, the children with SLI performed signiﬁcantly worse than the children with ASD, U (39) = 75, p < . 001, r = –. 535, though strong correlations arose between phonology and morphosyntax in both groups of children (ASD.  rs = . 560, p = . 012, df = 18.  SLI.  rs = . 731, p < . 0001, df = 18).  The same tendencies were found when comparing the subgroup of 8 children with high-functioning autism and language impairment (the HFA-LI subgroup) to a subgroup of 8 children with SLI matched on nonverbal ability and age.  Finally, our study involved two control groups of TD children, one comprising 17 4-year-olds (M = 4. 3, SD = 0. 2), approximate language controls for the SLI group, and the other 12 6-year-olds (M = 6. 5, SD = 0. 2), who were the same age as the youngest children in the SLI and ASD groups.  Procedure.  Written consent was obtained from the parents of the children who participated in the study.  Testing was organized individually and took place in a quiet room.  The experimental protocol contained standardized measures of language (as seen above), nonverbal ability (via RPMs), and memory abilities (via forward digit span and backward digit span, which will not be reported on here).  Experimental tasks included a task of elicited production of clitic pronouns (reported elsewhere) and two tasks focusing on wh-questions.  a production task and a comprehension task (see below).  The protocol, whose total duration was about 2 hr, was divided into two 1-hr sessions.  As the tasks targeting production and comprehension of whquestions were relatively long (see below), they were each divided into two equal parts, which were randomly assigned to the ﬁrst or second testing session (with the production part always preceding the comprehension part).  For the ASD group, the number of testing sessions varied from one child to another, due to behaviorEXPERIMENT 1.  ELICITED PRODUCTION OF WH-QUESTIONS. In the wh-question production task (Jakubowicz, 2005, an adaptation of an experiment created by Naama Friedmann), the examiner showed the child a picture containing a character performing an action and a hidden part, as illustrated by Figure 1a.  The child was then told to ask the character a question about the hidden part (e. g. , “Look, here the rabbit is pushing someone, but we can’t see who.  To know who the rabbit is pushing, ask him”).  Following the child’s response, the hidden part was then revealed, as shown in Figure 1b.  Different types of questions were elicited in this task, which were presented in (pseudo)randomized order.  subject (n = 12), object (n = 24.  12 animate and 12 inanimate), and adjunct questions (with comment “how,” où “where,” and pourquoi “why”.  n = 18), for a total of 54 items.  The task contained 5 training items, which followed the same format as the test items.  Note that after the 5 training items and the ﬁrst 4 test items, the stimulus only included a description of the picture (e. g. , “Here, the rabbit is pushing someone but we can’t see who”) followed by “Ask him/her. ” In other words, it stopped including an embedded question (e. g. , “To know who the rabbit is pushing”), making the stimulus less complex.  In this probe, each interrogative strategy illustrated in (1) used by the children was analyzed (wh–in situ, plain wh-fronting, wh-fronting + est-ce que, or wh-fronting + subject/verb inversion) in order to determine whether the children tended to avoid constructions involving more complex computation.  Results.  General success on the task, that is, the number of wh-questions produced by each child that were appropriate in that they consisted of a wh-question of the type elicited, provided a base measure upon which use of particular wh-strategies was explored.  We also compared error typologies in the wh-questions produced by the children.  Appropriate responses and wh-strategies.  Figure 2 presents the results concerning the number of appropriate responses produced by the different groups of children (/54).  The difference between the four groups was signiﬁcant, χ2 (3, N = 69) = 25. 830, p < . 0001.  The children with ASD produced signiﬁcantly fewer appropriate questions than the children with SLI (ASD.  M = 32. 7, SD = 14. 9 vs.  SLI.  M = 46. 7, SD = 6. 0).  U (39) = 87. 5, p = . 002, r = –. 482, the TD4 children (M = 46. 4, SD = 5. 9).  U (36) = 78. 5, p = . 005, r = –. 459, and the TD6 children (M = 52. 3, SD = 1. 6).  U (31) = 17. 5, p < . 0001, r = –. 708.  In particular, 8 children with ASD (out of 20) produced fewer than 27 expected wh-questions (less than 50%), compared to 1 child with SLI.  The ASD/SLI difference held when the subgroup of 8 children with HFA and LI was compared to an RPM- and age-matched subgroup of children with SLI, U (15) = 2, p = . 002, r = –. 788.  More generally, there was no signiﬁcant correlation between the number of appropriate wh-questions produced and nonverbal ability in the ASD group (rs = . 111, p = . 643, df = 19).  This difference between the children with ASD and the children with SLI can be attributed, we argue, to the well-known pragmatic deﬁcit associated with ASD.  Speciﬁcally, the children with ASD may have had difﬁculties with the pragmatics of a task requiring them to address a character in a picture on a computer screen.  One child explicitly asked if we wanted him to talk to the computer, for example.  Instead of wh-questions, they used yes/no questions, or they tried to guess the answer to the question they were being asked to formulate (see Sukenik, Friedmann, Tuller, & Morin, 2015).  When appropriate wh-questions were produced, we sought to determine, ﬁrst of all, if children with ASD avoided complex wh-strategies, in the same way as children with SLI.  We begin with the wh–in situ strategy (e. g. , Tu pousses quoi.  “You push what. ”), a strategy that entails avoidance of wh-movement.  Figure 3 displays the rate of wh–in situ found in the appropriate wh-questions produced by the different groups.  Note that the calculations did not include subject wh-questions (to which we return below) as these include structures that are ambiguous between wh–in situ and wh-fronting, since the subject position is sentence initial in French, the same linear position as that of wh-fronted constituents (e. g. , Qui te pousse.  “Who pushes you. ”), and wh-questions with pourquoi “why” since it has been argued that pourquoi is base generated in the fronted position (and thus not subject to overt wh-movement.  Rizzi, 1990).  The difference across groups was signiﬁcant, χ2 (3, N= 69)= 23. 312, p < . 0001.  As can be seen in Figure 3, the children with ASD, like the children with SLI, used wh -in situ, the least complex strategy, more frequently than the TD 6-year-olds.  Wh–in situ was found in 31. 8% (SD = 38. 5) of the appropriate questions produced by the ASD group and in 62. 8% (SD = 34. 8) of those produced by the SLI group, compared to 3% (SD = 10. 5) in the TD6 group.  The differences between the TD 6-year-olds and the children with ASD and SLI were signiﬁcant, ASD/TD6.  U (31) = 51. 5, p = . 003, r = –. 520.  SLI/TD6.  U (31) = 11. 5, p < . 0001, r = –. 767.  This suggests that, like the children with SLI, many children with ASD avoided constructions that entail complex syntactic computation.  Although the children with SLI used wh–in situ questions more frequently than the children with ASD, the difference between the two groups was not signiﬁcant, after corrections for multiple comparisons were applied, U (39) = 114. 5, p = . 02, r = –. 367.  The children with ASD seemed to behave similarly to the TD4 group, who produced 25. 9% (SD = 37. 5) of questions with wh–in situ.  the difference between the two groups was not statistically signiﬁcant, U (36) = 149. 5, p = . 520.  In contrast, the children with SLI seemed to avoid constructions that entail complex syntactic computation even more often than the TD4 group, U (36) = 72, p = . 003, r = –. 493.  These tendencies were maintained when comparing the performance of children of the HFA-LI subgroup (M = 36. 9%, SD = 42. 8) to that of the matched children with SLI (M = 66. 9%, SD = 37. 4), although the difference was not statistically signiﬁcant, presumably due to the small size of the samples, U (15) = 22, p= . 293.  It is also worth mentioning that no signiﬁcant correlations were found between nonverbal ability and percentage of questions with wh–in situ in the ASD group (rs = . 256, p = . 276, df = 19).  Finally, since the wh-questions investigated in the comprehension probe all targeted animate objects, we also looked at the rate of wh–in situ in qui “who” object questions produced by the children (e. g. , Il pousse qui.  “He pushes who. ”).  The same tendencies reported above were observed.  Another way of determining whether the children with ASD resembled the children with SLI in avoiding complex wh- production strategies was to see if they avoided the most complex of the fronting strategies in questions produced with wh-fronting, that involving wh-fronting and subject/verb inversion.  This was the case, as is seen in Figure 4, which displays the incidence of the different whfronting strategies with respect to the total of questions produced with wh-fronting (excluding subject questions, since these may be produced with structures that are ambiguous as to whether wh-fronting has occurred or not, and why-questions, because why occurs only clause initially).  Signiﬁcant differences were found across groups, χ2 (3, N = 69) = 28. 055, p < . 0001.  Both groups of atypically developing children produced signiﬁcantly fewer questions with wh-fronting + subject/verb inversion (e. g. , Qui pousses-tu.  “Who do you push. ”) than the TD 6-year-olds.  Subject/verb inversion was found in 2. 4% of all wh-fronted questions produced by the children with ASD (SD = 10. 8) and in 1. 1% (SD = 3. 4) of those produced by the children with SLI, compared with 22. 2% (SD = 27. 5) in the TD6 group, ASD/TD6.  U (31) = 49, p < . 0001, r = –. 616.  SLI/TD6.  U (31) = 48, p = . 001, r = –. 603.  Very few children in the ASD and SLI groups produced wh-questions with subject/verb inversion, including 1 child with ASD (a high-functioning child with no language impairment) and 2 children with SLI, versus 8 (out of 12) in the TD6 group.  The children with ASD and those with SLI were more comparable to the TD 4-year-olds, who did not produce any questions with subject/verb inversion at all.  No signiﬁcant differences were found between the ASD and SLI groups, U (39) = 191, p = . 594.  The children in the ASD and SLI groups not only avoided the most complex fronting strategy but also mainly used the least complex strategy, plain wh-fronting (e. g. , Où tu caches les bonbons.  “Where you hide the candy. ”), as did the TD children.  The difference across groups was signiﬁcant, χ2 (3, N= 69)= 11. 1, p= . 011, which was due to a difference between the SLI and TD6 groups, U (31) = 27. 5, p < . 0001, r = –. 642.  The rate of plain wh-fronting in the ASD group did not differ signiﬁcantly from that of the TD groups, ASD/TD4.  U (36) = 92. 5, p = . 092.  ASD/TD6.  U (31) = 90, p = . 616.  However, the children with ASD produced less plain wh-fronting (M = 58. 6%, SD = 39. 7) than the SLI group (M = 87. 6%, SD = 15. 5), although the difference was not signiﬁcant, U (39) = 132, p = . 068.  Whereas the children with SLI used plain wh-fronting far more frequently than any other fronting strategy, the children with ASD produced whquestions with ESK (e. g. , Comment est-ce que tu mélanges la pâte.  “How ESK you mix the batter. ”) relatively often (M = 31. 2%, SD = 37. 5), and to a significantly larger extent than the children with SLI (M = 4%, SD = 8. 9), U (39) = 110, p = . 006, r = –. 435.  In this respect, the children with ASD behaved similarly to the TD 4-year-olds (M = 19. 8%, SD = 22. 2).  U (36) = 151. 5, p = . 560, and the TD 6-year-olds (M = 18. 5%, SD = 14. 3).  U (31) = 116, p = . 874.  In contrast, the differences between the children with SLI and the TD children on use of ESK were signiﬁcant, SLI/TD4.  U (36) = 97, p = . 011, r = –. 419.  SLI/TD6.  U (31) = 44. 5, p = . 001, r = –. 573.  The children with ASD, then, did not seem to favor exactly the same strategies as the children with SLI.  This apparent difference is due to their high use of the ESK strategy.  The status of this strategy for many of the questions produced by the children with ASD, however, may have been the result of adoption of a single, rigid wh-strategy, applied over and over again.  Out of the 12 children with ASD who produced ESK questions, 7 of these children did so in over 50% of their questions with wh-fronting, and only in a ﬁxed form qu’est-ce que “what+ESK,” which they generalized to all of their wh-questions.  For example, AUJ (age 9. 2) used qu’est-ce que in all of his wh-questions, except for 4, without distinguishing between different wh-words, as shown in (3).  In some cases, the wh-questions that he produced were (fortuitously) appropriate (10/50 questions produced with qu’est-ce que), as in (3a), but most of the time (37/50) they were not, as in (3b).  With adjunct questions, use of qu’est-ce que was both inappropriate and ungrammatical, as in (3c).  It would seem therefore plausible that for at least some of the children with ASD qu’est-ce que was used as a kind of unanalyzed wh-form and thus that their ESK questions did not constitute evidence for greater complexity than that involved in wh-questions with plain wh-fronting.  The high rate of ESK is furthermore likely to be a reﬂection of perseveration, which was observed for several of the children with ASD in this task (see Sukenik et al. , 2015).  We also note that perseveration of “qu’est-ce que,” which involves wh-fronting, had a mechanical consequence on the lower rate of wh–in situ in the ASD group when compared to the SLI group (see above).  Finally, production of clefted wh-questions (e. g. , C’est qui que tu pousses.  “It is who that you push. ”) did not yield any signiﬁcant difference across groups, χ2 (3, N = 69) = 3. 555, p = . 314.  In the ASD and SLI groups, these constructions were used less often than wh-questions with plain wh-fronting, but more often than wh-fronting with subject/verb inversion (ASD.  M = 7. 8%, SD = 22. 6.  SLI.  M = 7. 3%, SD = 11. 7), which matches the predictions of the computational complexity hypothesis since clefting is more complex than plain-fronting but less complex than wh-fronting with subject/verb inversion.  Likewise, in the TD4 group, clefting (M = 6. 1%, SD = 15. 1) was less frequently produced than plain wh-fronting (M = 74. 1%, SD = 23. 6), but more frequently than wh-fronting with subject/verb inversion (M = 0%), whereas, for the older TD6 children, the rate of clefting (M = 3. 6%, SD = 8) was lower than that of subject/verb inversion (M = 22. 2%, SD = 27. 5).  With respect to the six children with ASD and no severe impairment on the standardized language tests, we found that two of them used plain wh-fronting in almost all of their questions involving wh-movement (at least 75%), whereas for the four others the rate of plain wh-fronting was below 40%.  It was interesting that this group of six children included the only child with ASD who produced wh-questions with subject/verb inversion (KIH, age 10. 5), and most of these children (ﬁve/six) did not make frequent use of wh-fronting + ESK (less than 30% of the time), compared to six children in the rest of the children with ASD for whom wh-fronting + ESK represented at least 80% of their questions with whmovement (half with normal nonverbal ability).  This suggests that the children with ASD and no severe language impairment tended to perseverate with qu’estce que.  less than the other children.  Finally, in the ASD group, no signiﬁcant correlations were found between nonverbal ability and use of plain wh-fronting (rs = –. 073, p = . 760), wh-fronting + ESK (rs = . 131, p = . 583), and clefting (rs = . 082, p = . 732) (all dfs = 19).  Note that correlations were not calculated with wh-fronting and subject/verb inversion as this strategy was produced by only oneDid the production of subject wh-questions follow the same trends just reported for object and adjunct questions, with the ASD group generally resembling the SLI group in displaying avoidance of the most complex wh- strategies, and high rates for the least complex strategies.  Four different strategies were used by children in the production of subject wh-questions (see Figure 5).  those structurally ambiguous between plain wh-fronting and wh–in situ (e. g. , Qui te mord.  “Who bites you. ”), and questions with wh-fronting + ESK (e. g. , Qui est-ce qui te mord.  “Who is it that bites you. ”), with wh-fronting + c’est (e. g. , Qui c’est qui te mord.  “Who it is that bites you. ”), and with clefting (e. g. , C’est qui qui te mord.  “It is who that bites you. ”). 10 The ﬁrst type of questions is the least complex since these questions involve either a subject wh-phrase in situ or a plain-fronted subject wh-phrase, whereas the other types of questions involve at least an additional operation besides wh-fronting.  Signiﬁcant group differences were found for subject wh-questions structurally ambiguous between wh–in situ and wh-fronting, χ2 (3, N = 69) = 8. 945, p = . 030, and clefts, χ2 (3, N= 69)= 12. 120, p= . 007, but not for questions with ESK, χ2 (3, N = 69) = 5. 767, p = . 124.  As shown in Figure 5, structurally ambiguous subject wh-questions were used to a greater extent (M = 56. 9%, SD = 47. 2) than other subject questions by the children with ASD, in particular wh-fronting + ESK (M = 23%, SD = 41. 7) and clefts (M = 16. 8%, SD = 33. 9).  This trend was observed in all of the children with ASD, including the six children who did not display severe impairment on the standardized language tests.  The children with SLI also used structurally ambiguous wh-questions most of the time (M = 49. 2%, SD = 41. 6), at about the same rate as the children with ASD, U (39) = 150. 5, p = . 538.  Clefting was, however, more frequent in the SLI group (M = 46. 4%, SD = 40. 7) than in the ASD group, U (39) = 90, p = . 010, r = –. 423.  However, the clefts produced by the children with SLI were largely ungrammatical, and their syntax was probably more akin to the syntax of wh–in situ, the least complex strategy.  Wh-fronting + ESK was again less frequent in the SLI group (SLI.  M = 0. 5%, SD = 2).  Only one child with SLI produced any such subject questions (representing 9. 1% of the total of his subject questions), whereas ﬁve children with ASD did, and four of them repeatedly (at least 80% of their subject questions).  These same children, three of them HF, also used wh-fronting + ESK in all of their object questions, lending support to the hypothesis these high rates are due to perseveration of this strategy.  Note that the differences between the ASD and SLI groups on subject wh-questions displaying ESK or clefting held when comparing the HFA-LI group and their matched group of children with SLI.  No signiﬁcant differences were found between the children with ASD and the TD children with respect to subject questions syntactically ambiguous between wh–in situ and plain wh-fronting, and clefts.  however, signiﬁcant differences arose when the children with SLI and the TD6 children were compared, syntactically ambiguous questions.  U (31) = 45. 5, p = . 002, r = –. 545.  clefts.  U (31) = 45, p = . 002 r = –. 554.  Finally, no signiﬁcant correlations were found between nonverbal ability and the production of the different subject wh-questions in the ASD group (structurally ambiguous questions.  rs = –. 282, p = . 272, df = 19.  wh-fronting + ESK.  rs = . 425, p = . 089, df = 19.  clefts.  rs = –. 278, p = . 280, df = 19).  Error analysis.  Figure 6 reports, for each group, the percentage of appropriate wh-questions produced in each group that contained at least one error.  Signiﬁcant differences were found across groups, χ2 (3, N = 69) = 31. 227, p < . 0001.  As can be seen in Figure 6, the rate of erroneous questions found in the ASD group (M = 17. 3%, SD = 16. 2) was signiﬁcantly higher than in the two younger TD groups, TD4.  M = 6. 1%, SD = 7. 1.  U (36) = 87, p = . 011, r = –. 418.  TD6.  M = 1. 2%, SD = 2.  U (31) = 18, p < . 0001, r = –. 711.  The same pattern was observed in the children with SLI, whose mean rate of erroneous wh-questions was 35. 2% (SD = 31. 2), SLI/TD4.  U (36) = 60. 5, p = . 001, r = –. 551.  SLI/TD6.  U (31) = 14. 5, p < . 0001, r = –. 737. 11 The incidence of errors was higher in the SLI group than in the ASD group, although the difference was not signiﬁcant, U (39) = 138. 5, p = . 096.  As expected, the 6 children with ASD who did not display severe impairment on the standardized language tests produced very few errors in their wh-questions.  their rate of erroneous questions was 6. 2% (SD = 5. 3), compared to 22% (SD = 17. 1) for the 14 other children with ASD.  Eight of these other children, who formed the HFA-LI subgroup, had a comparable rate of erroneous wh-questions as the matched SLI subgroup (25. 4% versus 32. 4% respectively).  U (15) = 28. 5, p = . 713.  Finally, no signiﬁcant correlations were found between nonverbal ability and the percentage of erroneous questions produced by the children with ASD (rs = . 089, p = . 709, df = 19).  Were the error types found in the children with ASD similar to those found in the SLI group.  The same error types were found in each of the groups.  errors on the wh-word, on the subject, on the object, on the verb, and on the complementizer (C). 