INTRODUCTION.  Issues of how to analyze gender and sexual identities in interaction have been largely already discussed, in particular in the field of Conversation Analysis (CA) (Schegloff 1997, 1998.  Wetherell 1998.  Kitzinger 2000.  Speer and Stokoe 2011).  Some of the criticism addressed by conversation analysts is that much of the research on the relationships between language, gender, and sexuality lies in understanding speakers and talk as predetermined by abstract discourses ‘from above’ or ‘beyond’ talk (Speer and Stokoe 2011.  7).  Schegloff (1997) claims that gender has to be demonstrably relevant to the participants – instead of being (a priori and exogenously) imposed by analysts – in order to be used as an analytical social category in social interaction.  The author notes, for instance, that it is not enough to justify referring to someone as a ‘woman’ just because she is, in fact, a woman – because she is, by the same token, a Californian, Jewish, a mediator, a former weaver, my wife, and many other things.  (Schegloff 1997. CA methodological criteria on what counts as analytical categories, and its reluctance to bring wider (or macro) social issues2 – such as power, heteronormativity, and oppression – aprioristically into the analysis, have not gone without criticism (e. g.  Wetherell 1998).  In response to the criticism of CA’s conceptualization of what actually is relevant to the participants or what constitutes participants’ orientation to gender (e. g.  Wetherell 1998.  Ehrlich 2002), a number of scholars have demonstrated how powerful the conversational analytical lenses might be at grasping gender and sexual identities in action (e. g.  Ehrlich 2002.  Kitzinger 2005, 2007.  Speer and Stokoe 2011.  Ostermann and Kitzinger 2012).  As Weatherall (2002.  768) points out, [b]eing limited, as an analyst, to the overtly displayed concerns of the participants is not to say that gender is not omni-relevant.  What it does mean is that it is incumbent on the researcher to show how and that gender as omnirelevant is produced and oriented to.  Moreover, once analysts have demonstrated and described the specific and practical ways of how gender is actualized in interaction, this might also allow them to show how such practices could possibly be changed (Ostermann and Kitzinger 2012).  Aligned with the perspective taken by other studies interested in unveiling how participants orient to gender and sexuality in talk and how larger social constructs come into being in social interaction, the current study also takes up Garfinkel’s ethnomethodological claim (1967) that it is part of the analysts’ task to actually show how interactants’ production of their everyday activities is informed by certain categorizations and how the interactants demonstrate their oriention to them (Stokoe 2000, 2006.  Stokoe and Smithson 2001.  Stokoe and Weatherall 2002.  Speer and Stokoe 2011).  In other words, the analysis and discussion presented in this paper assume an understanding that interactants are continuously attributing meaning to and demonstrating their understanding of interactions, the world around them and what is happening here and now.  Thus, a close analysis of naturally occurring interactions is taken here as central to explaining the methods and everyday practices that participants use in order to produce such worlds (Garfinkel 1967.  Speer and Stokoe 2011).  Such perspective also reflects how this paper connects with the special theme of this issue.  The perspective assumed here is not one of North and South, West and non-West, developed and developing (or even underdeveloped), First and Third World, center and periphery, or the macro and micro.  Instead, it assumes a tentatively less dichotomous perspective that proposes to simply shift our point of departure by first looking at the ‘margins’ (Milani 2014), and only then investigating how the margins – perhaps unavoidably – relate (or not) to what has been taken to be the ‘metropole’.  What I propose, in fact, is not new.  to (firstly) look at and (only later) theorize from language where language is actually used.  to look at and theorize from the actual sites where people are interacting in the world to carry out their everyday affairs, investigating how they orient (or not) to certain categories and how they make sense of the world while doing so. 3 In this sense, Conversation Analysis and categorization analysis serve as empowering analytical lenses to investigate participants’ own understandings and categorizations of gender and sexuality.  In order to frame the analysis of this paper within the larger theme of the Special Issue, I take here Comaroff and Comaroff’s invitation (2012a. 