 Many high-risk, high-consequence technical environments, including air trafﬁc control, hydroelectric power generation, and emergency services, are characterized by time pressure, uncertainty, and dynamic relationships between components (Orasanu & Connolly, 1993).  The safe and efﬁcient management of these environments is reliant upon effective communication between operators, where any communication error has the potential for a signiﬁcant loss (Australian Transport Safety Bureau, 2007).  The process of communication within such domains is inherently a joint activity between communicative partners (Clark, 1994.  Clark & Schaefer, 1989).  Models of dialogue structure, such as the collaborative model (Clark, 1994.  Clark & Brennan, 1991.  Clark & Schaefer, 1987, 1989.  Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986), emphasize that both communicative partners have a shared responsibility to ensure that information exchanged has been appropriately heard and understood before the conversation proceeds.  A communicative exchange involves two distinct stages.  the presentation of information and the grounding of that information (Clark & Schaefer, 1987).  During the presentation stage, the sender will provide information for the receiver to interpret and from which meaning can be derived.  During the grounding stage, the sender and receiver collaborate to ensure that the receiver has understood the sender’s intended message (Clark & Brennan, 1991.  Clark & Schaefer, 1987).  For grounding to take place, the receiver must demonstrate evidence of understanding to the sender, and the sender must accept the evidence as true.  When the process of grounding is successful, the utterance from the sender is referred to as “common ground” between the two communicative participants (Clark & Schaefer, 1987, p.  19).  MISCOMMUNICATION.  Although the objective of any communicative transaction is to ensure mutual understanding between all participants (Dascal & Berenstein, 1987), communication has been identiﬁed as a contributing factor in a signiﬁcant proportion of errors within many high-risk industries (Kim, Park, Han, & Kim, 2010).  For example, Billings and Cheaney (1981) noted that information transfer difﬁculties were a primary factor in over 70% of cases reported to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Aviation Safety Reporting System.  Similarly, Greenberg et al. 