I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Although speakers and addressees have a large repertoire of conventional lexical meanings, they can go beyond these to communicate a seemingly indeﬁnite number of context-dependent meanings.  Metonymy is one case of this, where an expression is used to refer to something that falls outside its conventional denotation, with a clear associative relation linking the conventional denotation and the contextually determined, metonymic one.  Consider Nunberg’s () classic example in ().  () The ham sandwich left without paying.  Uttered by one waiter to another in a restaurant, the expression the ham sandwich refers to the customer who ordered the ham sandwich, and exploits the immediate accessibility (or salience) of the associative relation between the customer and his order.  Another common case is the use of names of artists or authors to refer to their works, as in Woolf is on the top shelf.  While such metonymic uses by adults are common, little is known about how metonymy is understood or used by children.  Do young children understand the pragmatics of metonymy, and do they use metonyms themselves.  If so, when does this ability emerge in development.  Children rely early on their pragmatic abilities in word learning, and are sensitive to speaker intentions (Bloom, ), discourse status (Akhtar, Carpenter & Tomasello, ), and speakers’ word choices (Clark, ).  Young children also make use of context in interpreting class extensions (Bushnell & Maratsos, ), polysemy (Rabagliati, Marcus & Pylkkänen, ), and, under some conditions, metaphors (Özçaliskan, ) and scalar terms (Papafragou & Musolino, .  but see also Noveck, ).  Does this early pragmatic skill extend to metonymy.  In this study, we investigate how three- to ﬁve-year-olds understand and produce novel metonyms.  We tested their ability to understand and explain metonymic meanings in a comprehension task designed for their level of world knowledge and linguistic skill.  We also looked at their ability to produce metonyms in two tasks.  In the ﬁrst, we focused on their use of metonymy as a shorthand device, and in the second, on its use in naming animates based on a salient property.  Evidence that young children can manage metonymic meanings would support the view that preschool children start to use ﬁgurative language early, along with some of the relevant pragmatic inferences.  The pragmatics of metonymy.  We can distinguish between two kinds of metonymy.  referential metonymy, which relates one entity with another (e. g.  The ham sandwich for ‘The customer who ordered the ham sandwich’, as in () above), and propositional metonymy, which relates two propositions (e. g.  The athlete made it to the podium for ‘The athlete won a medal’) (Warren, ).  In this study, we focus on referential metonymy.  The primary communicative function of referential metonymy is usually taken to be that of economizing on processing eﬀort in making a reference.  On this view, a metonym is a shorthand for a more elaborate expression, and the aim is quick and easy referent identiﬁcation (Lakoﬀ & Johnson, .  Nunberg, .  Papafragou, ).  Metonymy as a shorthand device diﬀers from linguistic abbreviation (or ellipsis), where actual words are omitted (e. g.  uttering The Commons for The House of Commons), in that it picks out a salient aspect of a referent to ‘stand for’ the referent as a whole, and is therefore sometimes described as a form of “cognitive abbreviation” (Nerlich & Clarke, , p.  ).  A metonymic shorthand of course also involves a kind of linguistic abbreviation in the sense that, in most cases, there exists a readily available paraphrase (e. g.  The ham sandwich vs.  The customer who ordered the ham sandwich).  however, it does not involve actual linguistic ellipsis.  Referential metonymy is often described as a ‘regular’ process, where metonymic expressions instantiate underlying patterns, either in the form of stable conceptual associations (so-called ‘conceptual metonymy’.  cf.  Lakoﬀ & Johnson, .  Radden & Kövecses, ) or even as the result of some kind of (lexical) rule (Apresjan, .  Copestake & Briscoe, .  Frisson & Pickering, ).  For example, the metonymic relation PRODUCER FOR PRODUCT is productive and makes it possible to understand the utterance John likes to read Needham as referring to books written by the author Needham, even though we might have never heard of this author before (Frisson & Pickering, ).  How are such metonymic patterns acquired.  And are children as sensitive to them as adults.  Our preliminary analyses of conversational interactions between children and their caregivers from the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, ) suggested that one productive metonymic pattern available to young children is COMPONENT FOR GAME, linguistically realized as play NP, as in Let’s play (the) zebras (‘the game that has zebras as a salient component’).  Metonymy, then, could well serve early on as a productive referential strategy for young children.  While much has been said about metonymy as a shorthand referential device in the theoretical literature, another communicative function of referential metonymy has received less attention, namely its use to highlight a particular property of the referent, thereby giving rise to a slight (sometimes witty or playful) deprecation of the referent (e. g.  The big mouth is coming to the meeting).  In these cases, referential metonymy serves as a naming device, much as nicknames do, where a salient property of an individual or object is used to create a new name (Papafragou, ).  While the use of (derogatory) metonymic nicknames (e. g.  Four Eyes, Chubby, Skinny Bones, etc. ) is well documented among primary school children (Crozier & Dimmock, ), little is known about its use among preschoolers.  Use of metonyms with a naming function might require more metalinguistic ability than simple shorthand uses, since the speaker replaces a conventional term with a new one to achieve a certain eﬀect.  Children’s metonymic skills.  In metonymy, salient associative relations (typically, relations of contiguity) are exploited for the purpose of communication.  The ability to identify such relations is present early on.  Categorization studies show that hierarchical classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of (part–whole) contiguity relations emerge early in the preschool years (Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson & Boyes-Braem, ).  Also, many of children’s early referential strategies exploit salient associative relations, and thus have an aﬃnity with metonymy.  Some iconic gestures made by infants bear a part–whole, ‘metonymic’ relation to the meaning represented, e. g.  clapping hands for ‘baseball game’, smacking lips for ‘food’, and so on (Acredolo & Goodwyn, .  Kendon, .  Mittelberg, ).  This is also true of some early referring expressions, e. g.  onomatopoeias such as bow-wow for ‘dog’, and vroom-vroom for ‘vehicle’, and some strategies young children use to ﬁll gaps in their vocabulary.  For instance, overextensions based on perceptual, spatio-temporal, and functional contiguity (e. g.  toy for ‘a bag which habitually contains toys’, cf.  Huttenlocher & Smiley, ), could be viewed as precursors to metonymy (Nerlich, Clarke & Todd, ).  Also, when children coin new words, one highly productive strategy they rely on in English is zero-derivation, that is, the use of nouns as verbs (e. g.  to gun for ‘to shoot’).  Children begin to rely on this option as young as age two (Bushnell & Maratsos, .  Clark, ).  These lexical innovations appear to follow the ‘metonymic’ rule that almost any noun denoting an object can be used as a verb for talking about some state, process, or activity associated with that object (Clark & Clark, .  Schönefeld, ).  Another productive operation for coining nouns is compounding, and young English-speaking children frequently construct novel root compounds for subcategories (Clark, Gelman & Lane, .  see also Konieczna & Kleparski, ), some of which could be metonymically motivated (e. g.  clown-boy for ‘the boy who is a clown’, daddy-seed for ‘the seed that is a daddy’), highlighting a salient characteristic of the entity in question.  In short, since even very young children exploit salient associative relations for the purpose of communication, the main prerequisite for metonymy use appears to be present early on.  Does metonymy serve acommunicative function similar to other early referential strategies attested in compensating for vocabulary gaps and/or limited expressive ability.  Note that the notion of metonymy used throughout this paper is broader than the one assumed by classical rhetoric, where the speaker is seen as consciously ‘replacing’ a conventional, literal expression with a related metonymic one.  Instead, we follow contemporary pragmatic theory which, drawing on theoretical arguments and evidence from psycholinguistic studies, rejects such a sharp distinction between ﬁgurative and literal utterances and proposes that ﬁgurative utterances, which arise naturally and spontaneously for purposes of communication, exploit features that also occur in a range of ordinary ‘literal’ utterances (Wilson & Sperber, ).  In referential metonymy, the speaker exploits accessible associative links in making a reference.  In this way, a use of what we call a ‘referential metonym’ would depend on the ability to recognize and make use of such associative links in identifying a referent, but would not necessarily have to involve knowledge of the conventional term for the intended referent (though this would typically be the case in more sophisticated uses).  Figurative language development.  metaphor and metonymy.  Most research on ﬁgurative language development has focused on children’s ability to produce and understand metaphor (e. g.  John is a lion), a matter of debate for several decades (see Gibbs, , for a review).  Earlier studies observed that children tended to interpret metaphors literally, and concluded that metaphor comprehension was a complex skill that did not emerge until late in development (e. g.  Asch & Nerlove, .  Billow, .  Winner, Rosenstiel & Gardner, ).  Some researchers also proposed that there is a ‘literal stage’ in ﬁgurative language development, characterized by a tendency towards literal interpretations, before children attain a more sophisticated level of ﬁgurative use (e. g.  Levorato & Cacciari, .  Winner, /).  However, more recent studies suggest that the lack of comprehension found in earlier studies of metaphor may have resulted from the complexity of the tasks, and in fact attest to an early metaphoric ability in both comprehension and production, emerging during the preschool years (see Deamer, .  Gottfried, .  Özçalışkan, .  Pouscolous, ).  Few studies have explored children’s metonymic skill directly, and, to the best of our knowledge, none has investigated preschoolers’ ability to produce metonyms.  In one comprehension study with a forced-choice task, Nerlich et al.  () found that four- and ﬁve-year-olds outperformed two- and three-year-olds, but both groups did better when they received ‘clues’ that made the association between the literal and metonymic reference explicit.  Another study compared comprehension of metonyms and metaphors with conventional ﬁgurative meanings, from age ﬁve to thirty-seven years (Rundblad & Annaz, ).  Overall performance improved with age, but comprehension developed more slowly for metaphors than for metonyms.  This was interpreted as supporting the view that metonymy is more basic, cognitively, than metaphor.  <Middle> These studies.  raise a general methodological question.  Were the researchers in fact measuring vocabulary the children had already acquired or their pragmatic skill with metonyms.  When children acquire lexicalized metonyms (e. g.  Lego, where the name of the brand is used to refer to the toy bricks), they do not necessarily make the association that renders the metonym transparent.  rather, the metonym could be acquired as a conventional term for the referent in question – only later willthey learn that Lego is a brand name.  While understanding a novel metonym requires pragmatic skill and relies on contextual knowledge to license the metonymic association, comprehension of a lexicalized metonym may simply depend on whether the child has already acquired its conventional meaning.  A recent study investigated novel metonym and metaphor comprehension and found that comprehension increased with age, with some metonyms and metaphors understood even by the youngest participants, aged three (Van Herwegen, Dimitriou & Rundblad, ).  This suggests an early-emerging pragmatic capacity for dealing with novel ﬁgurative meanings, thus supporting recent results on metaphors.  While providing some insight into the metonymic ability of preschoolers, this study mainly aimed at comparing the long-term developmental trajectories of novel metonym and metaphor understanding in typically developing individuals and individuals with Williams syndrome.  To gain a clearer picture of metonymic ability, we need research on preschoolers’ comprehension and production of metonyms.  Hypotheses.  We began this research with the following expectations.  .  Given the evidence of some early ﬁgurative language ability in young children, we expected that, if children were presented with novel metonyms in a context where the underlying association was perceptually available and primed by the linguistic context, they should be able to understand some novel metonyms.  We also expected children to get better at interpreting and explaining metonymic meanings with age (Task ).  .  Given their attested early ability to make use of salient associative relations for communicative purposes, combined with some ﬁgurative understanding, we expected children to be able to produce some metonyms at an early age.  Our ﬁrst elicitation task was designed to test whether referential metonymy oﬀered children a strategy for referring with shorthands rather than ‘more literal’, descriptive phrases that might be more demanding syntactically or conceptually (Task ).  Metonymy might be a more economical alternative in planning terms, by allowing children to seize on a salient property of the referent with which to pick out the whole.  Our second elicitation task focused on referential metonymy with a naming function, testing whether young children could create metonymic names for individuals based on salient characteristics (Task ).  Since metonymic naming might require more metalinguistic skill, we expected that the ability to produce this kind of referential metonymy would be acquired later.  In this task, we also looked at whether children were helped by exposure to examples of common metonymic uses (e. g.  PROPERTY FOR INDIVIDUAL).  E X P E R I M E N T A L T A S K S.  We collected data with three diﬀerent tasks from forty-seven children and twenty-seven adults.  the ﬁrst task tested metonymy comprehension, and the second and third tested metonymy production.  Each task was presented as a game, so the study as a whole was perceived as a game session by the children.  The children fell into three age groups.   three-year-olds (M = . , SD = . ).   four-year-olds (M = . , SD = . ).  and  ﬁve-year-olds (M = . , SD = . ).  Half the children in each group were female, half male.  The children were from largely middle- to upper-class families, ethnically representative of the population in the Bay Area of Northern California, and all were acquiring English as a ﬁrst language.  The adults were twenty-seven native English-speaking undergraduates at Stanford University.  Half were female, half male.  They received class credit for their participation. The goal of the ﬁrst task was to ﬁnd out whether three-, four-, and ﬁve-year-olds understand novel metonyms, and whether they can reason verbally about their meanings.  Unlike earlier studies (Nerlich et al. , .  Rundblad & Annaz, .  but cf.  Van Herwegen, et al. , ), we relied on novel metonyms based on part–whole relations, with a salient physical property used to make reference to a person.  By using novel metonyms, we avoided the problem of determining whether a metonymic interpretation signalled actual understanding or simply prior acquisition of a conventional meaning.  We used a forced-choice story task with pictures, where the metonyms were all transparent in that they depended on perceptually available information.  The contextual information needed to make a correct metonymic interpretation was immediately accessible, so comprehension did not require activation of any background knowledge.  We therefore expected some metonyms to be understood by even the youngest children, and a general increase in metonymic skill with age.  We also asked children to explain their choices.  We expected that the ability to reason about metonymic meanings would improve with age, but that this kind of reﬂection might emerge later than comprehension itself, as has been shown for children’s explanations of metaphorical meanings (Özçalışkan, ).  M E T H O D.  Materials.  The stimuli consisted of ten sets of four pictures, each set presented in two steps.  First, the experimenter showed a large picture (see Figure ) that introduced a scenario involving two or more people, one of whom had a salient characteristic, e. g.  a pair of giant ears, a brightly coloured hat, a bicycle helmet, etc.  While showing the picture, the experimenter told a short story, the last part of which contained the target sentence mentioning the salient property.  In the metonymic condition, the target referred metonymically to the bearer of the property, as in ().  () This story is about these two girls.  They are standing outside talking before going home from work.  After they have been talking for a while, the helmet gets on her bike and rides home.  In the literal condition, the target referred directly to the property itself, as in ().  () This story is about these two women.  They are doing the dishes.  It gets very hot in the kitchen, so the bright jacket is placed on a chair.  The linguistic context of the stories supported the intended – metonymic or literal – reading.  Next, the experimenter showed three small pictures, close-ups of each individual in the story and the salient property by itself (see Figure ), and children had to choose the matching picture from this set.  The pictures were taken by the ﬁrst two authors, colour printed, and plasticized.  One set was used in a warm-up trial, and the remaining nine sets in experimental trials.  The experimental items consisted of six metonymic stories and three literal stories.  Procedure.  The task was presented as a game and took about  minutes to complete.  The child was ﬁrst shown the warm-up picture set, followed by the other nine.  Order of presentation was randomized across subjects and ages.  For each picture set, the experimenter told the child a story while showing the ﬁrst picture (Figure ).  After the ﬁnal, target sentence, the experimenter asked the child to pick out the picture (from the next three) that matched the story.  The child had the following choices.  Figure a.  The bearer of the property (i. e.  the metonymic referent).  Figure b.  The property by itself (i. e.  the literal referent).  Figure c.  Another participant in the story (i. e.  a distractor). Downloaded from https. //www. cambridge. org/core.  Universitaetsbibliothek Kaiserslautern, on 22 Dec 2018 at 14. 26. 29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https. //www. cambridge. org/core/terms.  https. //doi. org/10. 1017/S0305000915000720 F A L K U M E T A L.  Fig.  .  Percentages of LITERAL and METONYMIC readings in the two conditions (metonymic vs.  literal targets) in Task .   = Three-year-olds (nmet = .  nlit = ),  = Four-year-olds (nmet = .  nlit = ),  = Five-year-olds (nmet = .  nlit = ), A = Adults (nmet = .  nlit = ).  the experimenter repeated the story.  AtIf necessary, experimenter asked the child to explain her choice (Why did you choose that picture. ).  The same procedure was followed with adults.  the end, R E S U L T S The participants’ answers to the nine forced-choice questions were treated as a categorical variable and coded as METONYMIC reading, LITERAL reading, or DISTRACTOR.  Since children chose the distractor in only a small number of cases (% in the metonymic condition, % in the literal condition), we discarded these responses in subsequent analyses.  Figure  presents the percentages of METONYMIC and LITERAL readings in the two conditions by age (three, four, ﬁve, and adult).  Metonymic and literal conditions.  Using SPSS, we analyzed the data using logistic regression, which is more appropriate for categorical data than ANOVA (see Jaeger, ).  Adults were not included in the logistic regression analyses given their ceiling performance in both conditions (cf.  Figure ) and the absence of variance in their responses.  We examined comprehension of the target items as a function of the predictor variables age (three vs.  four vs.  ﬁve, with three as the baseline) and condition (metonymic vs.  literal, with metonymic as the baseline).  To examine age diﬀerences in comprehension in the two conditions, we included an interaction term between age and condition.  The analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of age (p = ·) and a signiﬁcant interaction between age and condition (p < ·).  First, in measuring the eﬀect of age at baseline, we observed that, compared with three-year-olds, four-year-olds were less likely to choose METONYMIC readings of metonymic targets (B = –·, OR = ·, p = ·, % CI [·, ·]), and ﬁve-year-olds even less so (B = –·, OR = ·, p = ·, % CI [·, ·]), In other words, there was a decrease in the number of correct METONYMIC readings, and an increase in the number of wrong LITERAL readings, from age three to ﬁve.  Second, to examine age diﬀerences within the literal condition, we ran an additional logistic regression with the same dependent and predictor variables as before but with literal as the baseline for condition.  This analysis also showed a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of age on comprehension (p = ·).  Compared with three-year-olds, both four-year-olds (B = ·, OR = ·, p = ·, % CI [·, ·]) and ﬁve-year-olds (B = ·, OR = ·, p = ·, % CI [·, ·]) were more likely to provide a correct interpretation for a literal target (although the eﬀect was only marginally significant for the four-year-olds), and comprehension improved with age.  This trend is the inverse of that observed in the metonymic condition, where the youngest children outperformed the older ones.  Comparison of the two conditions.  A simple logistic regression analysis of the eﬀect of condition (metonymic vs.  literal) on the dependent variable type of reading (METONYMIC vs.  LITERAL) showed a clear eﬀect of condition on type of reading (p < ·), with children overall being more likely to choose a METONYMIC reading in the metonymic condition than in the literal condition (B = ·, OR = ·, % CI [·, ·]).  This suggests some early understanding of novel metonymy among children aged three to ﬁve.  However, the signiﬁcant interaction between age and condition (p < ·) showed that age aﬀected comprehension in both conditions.  First, we observed that condition had no eﬀect on three-year-olds’ comprehension of target items (p = ·), which suggests that they did not ﬁnd the metonyms harder than the literal items.  Second, the interaction analysis showed a clear eﬀect of condition for four-year-olds (Interaction odds ratio (IOR) = ·/· = ·), who were about ﬁve times as likely to give correct answers in the literal than in the metonymic condition, and a large effect on ﬁve-year-olds’ comprehension in the two conditions (IOR = ·/· = ·).  This group was about seventeen times more likely to provide a correct answer in the literal condition compared to the metonymic condition.  Thus, children appeared to have more diﬃculty with novel metonyms as they got older.  Explaining their answers.  Next, we examined the explanations children gave for their choices in the metonymic condition.  Adults were excluded from this analysis as well, given their ceiling performance.  Children’s explanations of their correct interpretations of novel metonyms fell into three categories.  .  A RELEVANT explanation demonstrated clear understanding.  This could involve making the association between person and property explicit (e. g.  Because the girl has a helmet), substituting the metonymic for the literal referent, suggesting that the child had made the relevant association (e. g.  Cause she’s about to ride home), or rejecting the literal content of the target sentence (e. g.  Cause the moustache is sitting down ﬁrst.  [Pointing to the literal referent].  Not this one, where the moustache is sitting down alone. ).  .  A SEMI-RELEVANT explanation involved repetition of the metonym (e. g.  Cause that’s the big beard) or a paraphrase of the target sentence.  .  An IRRELEVANT explanation was uninformative as to whether the child had understood the metonym (e. g.  Cause it’s pretty).  We also included in this category cases in which children provided no answer.  Where children had given a wrong literal interpretation of the novel metonym, we divided their explanations into three additional categories.  .  ACCEPTANCE included what seemed to be straightforward acceptance of the literal meaning (e. g.  Cause the helmet is on the bike riding home).  .  EXPLICIT COMMENT was for cases where the child chose the literal interpretation but commented on its absurdity (e. g.  But the helmet can’t ride a bike!) and/or on what the speaker had actually ‘said’ (e. g.  Cause this one has the helmet, you didn’t say the person with the helmet).  .  IRRELEVANT answers were uninformative or irrelevant explanations (e. g.  Cause that’s the right picture), as well as those cases where children provided no answer.  To check inter-rater agreement, the ﬁrst two authors coded  explanations randomly selected from the children’s explanations for Task .  They were unaware of the child’s age when coding the answers.  We used Fleiss’ kappa (Fleiss, ), measured using the irr package in R.  κ = ·.  According to Landis and Koch (), a κ value above · indicates almost perfect agreement.  The percentages of children’s explanation types are presented in Tables  and .  Table  shows that for metonymic interpretations, all ages tended to oﬀer RELEVANT explanations.  A simple logistic regression analysis of the eﬀect of age (three-year-olds vs.  four-year-olds and ﬁve-year-olds) on the production of RELEVANT explanations was signiﬁcant (p < ·).  Compared (B = ·, OR = ·, with the three-year-olds, both four-year-olds p < ·, % CI [·, ·]) and ﬁve-year-olds (B = ·, OR = ·, p < ·, % CI [·, ·]) were more likely to produce explanations of this type.  However, an additional simple logistic regression analysis, with the same predictor and dependent variables but using ﬁve-year-olds as the baseline category for age, showed that the diﬀerence between the four-year-olds and the ﬁve-year-olds was not signiﬁcant (p = ·).  Inversely, there was a decrease in IRRELEVANT explanations with age for correct metonymic interpretations.  A simple logistic regression showed a signiﬁcant eﬀect of age on this explanation type (p < ·), with four-year-olds (B = –·, OR = ·, p = ·, % CI [·, ·]) and ﬁve-year-olds (B = –·, OR = ·, p = ·, % CI·]) signiﬁcantly less likely to provide IRRELEVANT explanations than three-year-olds.  A similar age eﬀect was found for IRRELEVANT explanations of literal interpretations (see Table ), with three-year-olds more likely than the other two age groups to provide such explanations (three-year-olds vs.  four-year-olds.  B = –·, OR = ·, p = ·, % CI [·, ·], three-year-olds vs.  ﬁve-year-olds.  B = –·, OR = ·, p = ·, % CI [·, ·]).  Finally, a simple logistic regression showed an eﬀect of age on the production of EXPLICIT COMMENTS for literal interpretations of metonyms (p = ·), with ﬁve-year-olds more likely to produce explanations of this type than three-year-olds (B = ·, OR = ·, p = ·, % CI [·, ,]).  However, three-year-olds and four-year-olds did not diﬀer here (p = ·).  D I S C U S S I O N Overall, these results show that children as young as three appear able to understand novel metonyms when the context makes the association transparent, but that, contrary to expectation, children did less well as they got older.  Our results also show that their reasoning about metonymy improves with age, although only for those children within each group who interpreted the metonyms correctly.  All the children had some way to go to attain adult levels of understanding.  Compared with adults, always correct in both conditions, children overall provided contextually appropriate metonymic interpretations only about half the time.  Still, they provided signiﬁcantly more metonymic interpretations for metonyms than for literal items.  And their explanations for correct interpretations show that, in most cases, their answers did indeed signal understanding.  However, the four- and ﬁve-year-olds appeared to ﬁnd literal items easier to understand than metonyms.  Children’s growing preference for literal interpretations appeared, at ﬁrst, quite puzzling.  What could cause three-year-olds’ performance to be closer to that of adults than to that of children only a year or two older.  A ‘U-shaped’ development has been observed in several cognitive domains (e. g.  Karmiloﬀ-Smith, ).  One well-known example comes from the acquisition of morphology, where children use correct irregular forms, then over-regularize them, and ﬁnally produce the correct forms, as in the verb went > goed > went in English (Bowerman, .  Ervin, ).  This has been hypothesized to be part of the process of developing the underlying cognitive representational systems involved, so that, despite adult-like performance, the youngest children rely on strategies diﬀerent from those of adults.  Let’s suppose that in metonymy comprehension, three-year-olds are using a pragmatic interpretive strategy that is ‘naively optimistic’ (Sperber, ) in the sense that they take the ﬁrst appropriate interpretation that comes to mind in context to be the one intended by the speaker.  This might involve seizing on anything that allows identiﬁcation of a referent (e. g.  the helmet, the moustache, etc. ), based on the contextually available associative link between the property and its bearer.  This interpretation would be the most accessible, least eﬀortful one that, at the same time, brings about a satisfactory result (i. e.  it is ‘relevant’ in Sperber and Wilson’s terms, /).  in the present case, it would match the story, be compatible with what children know about the world, allow further inferences about what will happen next, and so on.  Children who use such a naively optimistic strategy will accept the outcome as a good enough interpretation of the speaker’s intended meaning.  In the metonymic condition, where the context supported the metonymic interpretation, there would often be overlap between the meaning arrived at via a naive interpretation strategy and the one intended by the speaker.  Our data provide some evidence that the youngest children were indeed employing such a strategy.  three-year-olds hesitated much less than older children in making their interpretations.  So even though they were often successful in their interpretations of novel metonyms, the three-year-olds could have been using a diﬀerent interpretive strategy in which they went immediately for the ﬁrst interpretation that was accessible and relevant.  Adults, however, are likely to have used a more sophisticated strategy, in which they inferred that the speaker plausibly intended them to identify the metonymic referent on the basis of her utterance, the contextually available associative link between the property and its bearer, and the contextual evidence provided by the story (i. e.  they were ‘sophisticated understanders’ in Sperber’s terms, ).  One possible objection here might be that rather than identifying referents on the basis of metonymic associations, the three-year-olds were using some kind of primitive interpretation strategy where people are treated as agents by default, so they always chose a person as the intended referent.  But notice that most children picked the person with (not the one without) the salient property, which shows that something more than a personas-default-agent strategy must be in play.  It is possible that the propertyfor-person pattern could be one of the earliest forms of metonymy proper to emerge in young children because of the prototypical mapping of people and agents.  This also underlies adult uses of this metonymic pattern.  As an explanation of the older children’s tendency to choose literal interpretations of novel metonyms, we propose that it could be a by-product of their growing metalinguistic awareness – their ability to reﬂect on language and its use (Gombert, .  Karmiloﬀ-Smith, .  Tunmer, Pratt & Herriman, ).  Metalinguistic awareness is clearly present in four-year-olds (Doherty & Perner, ).  They recognize that words are objects in themselves, and have meanings that can be abstracted from contexts.  For instance, it is at age four to ﬁve that children show some delight in responding to indirect requests like Can you open the window.  with Yes and a smile.  This metalinguistic awareness could play a role in distinguishing between what is said (literal) and what is communicated (pragmatic), an ability that has been found to emerge around the same age (Vosniadou & Orthony, ).  This might lead children to overemphasize literal meanings, and so result in the literal preference we observed.  There is some support for this in children’s explanations in the metonymic condition.  the older children, ﬁve-year-olds in particular, frequently hesitated between a literal and a metonymic answer.  Furthermore, they sometimes commented explicitly on the literal content of the utterance with the metonym, usually with reference to its nonsensicality (Girl (. ).  “Because the glasses are reading.  [Laughs].  Glasses can’t read. ”), or referred back to what the experimenter had actually said in her utterance (Boy (. ).  “Cause the giant ears are going to drive.  That’s what you said. ”).  This type of explicit reﬂection was almost entirely absent in three-year-olds.  The literal bias shown by older children, then, could be due, not to an inability to understand novel metonyms, but to a conﬂict between two highly activated interpretations, one focused on linguistic meaning, the other on speaker meaning – a conﬂict that will eventually be resolved as children’s linguistic and pragmatic abilities mature further.  So the outcome here, where children’s metalinguistic reﬂection leads to a wrong result, gives the impression of poorer metonymic skill in the older children, while they are in reality attending to a larger picture than the younger children.  Note also that in the metonymic condition, metonymic interpretation should be easier to derive than the literal one.  in context, the perceptually available association between the property and its bearer, combined with children’s knowledge of the world, should make it more accessible, which could explain why three-year-olds did well.  In this way, the four- and ﬁve year olds might be using a more ‘cautious’ interpretation strategy (Sperber, ), in which they are able to take into account that the speaker might have misjudged what would be most accessible or relevant to them.  At the same time, their reﬂections on literal sentence meaning might have caused them to lose track of what the speaker might plausibly have intended to convey by her utterance.  It is tempting to ask whether this possible conﬂict between literal and speaker meanings is what earlier studies of metaphor comprehension tapped into, concluding that children are unable to understand metaphors (e. g.  Asch & Nerlove, .  Billow, .  Winner et al. , ), and whether their results might have been diﬀerent had they tested children under age four.  Another factor that might have inﬂuenced the ﬁve-year-olds’ literal answers is their ability to work with story worlds.  By age ﬁve, children have usually seen many cartoons (e. g.  Dora the Explorer) and are willing to accept that characteristics of the world they know can be violated.  How this story world ability might interact with ﬁgurative language skills in forming hypotheses about speaker-intended meanings, though, remains an issue for further investigation.  Our ﬁnding that children’s explanations of novel metonymic meanings improved with age for those children who provided correct metonymic interpretations, with four- and ﬁve-year-olds demonstrating metonymic understanding in their explanations signiﬁcantly more often than three-year-olds, is consistent with previous ﬁndings on children’s ability to put metaphorical meanings into words (Keil, .  Özçalışkan, .  Stites & Özçalışkan, ).  Although the older children chose metonymic interpretations less often than the younger ones, they demonstrated more explicit understanding of metonymy.  There was also a decrease with age in irrelevant explanations for correct interpretations of  the metonyms.  However, an irrelevant explanation should not be seen as evidence for a lack of understanding, given that understanding usually precedes the ability to paraphrase or explain (Özçalışkan, .  Vosniadou, .  Winner, Engel & Gardner, ).  We found the same pattern for literal interpretations of novel metonyms.  Not only does children’s ability to reason about metonymic meanings improve, but their metalinguistic ability allows for more explicit reﬂection on both linguistic and communicated meanings overall. Our second and third tasks focused on whether three- to five-year-olds can produce referential metonyms, and, if so, whether these include metonyms with both shorthand and naming functions.  Task  focused on referential metonyms used as shorthands, and looked at whether metonymy offers a useful referential strategy for children in place of fuller referring expressions that might be more demanding syntactically and/or conceptually.  As our analysis of the CHILDES corpus revealed, play NP (giving rise to the metonymic relation COMPONENT FOR GAME) appears as a productive pattern by age three, e. g. 