I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Cross-linguistic research is essential to theoretical development in language acquisition research, allowing us to determine universal as opposed to language-specific constraints on the acquisition process.  One structure that has received considerable attention in the grammatical acquisition literature is the relative clause (henceforth RC) (see Kidd, ).  In this paper we present three studies that investigated the acquisition of RCs in children acquiring Finnish, a language for which there is little data on RC acquisition.  Acquisition of relative clauses.  Most research on the acquisition of RCs has focused on age of acquisition and the level of difficulty children experience in naturalistic and experimental contexts with subject RCs such as (), object RCs such as (), and oblique RCs such as ().  () The dog that __ chased the cat.  () The cat that the dog chased ___.  () The dog to whom the boy gave the bone ___.  The general consensus amongst many scholars is that subject RCs are essentially easier to acquire than non-subject RCs, based on the following.  (a) subject RCs have been reported to emerge at an earlier developmental stage in naturalistic child language than non-subject RCs (e. g.  Brandt, Diessel & Tomasello, .  Diessel, .  Diessel & Tomasello, ).  (b) the majority of experimental evidence suggests that children perform best on subject RCs in comparison to other RC types (e. g.  Adani, .  de Villiers, Tager Flusberg, Hakuta & Cohen, .  Diessel & Tomasello, .  Friedmann, Belletti & Rizzi, .  Goodluck, .  Guasti, Stavrakaki & Arosio, .  Kas & Lukács, ), although more recently some scholars have noted that this effect appears to be modulated by distributional and typological features of individual languages (Arnon, .  Brandt, Kidd, Lieven & Tomasello, .  Diessel, .  Kidd, Brandt, Lieven & Tomasello ).  Even though there is general agreement on subject RC advantage over other RC types, there are several competing theoretical explanations for the effect, ranging from appeals to the primacy of subjects in syntactic derivation (either typologically.  Keenan & Comrie, .  or formally.  Rizzi, ), appeals to processing routines and memory capacity (O’Grady, ), and appeals to distributional frequency (Diessel, .  Kidd et al. , ).  These approaches often make very similar predictions and can be difficult to distinguish.  In the current paper we take a usage-based perspective, assuming that linguistic representations of structure are constructed on the basis of experience.  From this perspective we consider why, for Finnish, we do not observe a clear subject advantage in RC acquisition.  Subject–non-subject RC asymmetry.  The evidence for the subject–object asymmetry largely comes from a fairly narrow range of languages where RCs display distinct structural similarities (e. g.  English, German, and Hebrew).  In terms of RCs, these all are ‘head-first’ languages (i. e.  the RC comes after the (head)noun that it modifies).  Data from languages whose RCs do not display ‘head-first’ syntactic structure are less clear.  For instance, acquisition studies with children acquiring Basque (Carreiras, Duñabeitia, Vergara, de la Cruz-Pavía & Laka, .  Gutierrez-Mangado, ), Chinese (Chan, Matthews & Yip, .  Chen & Shirai, ), Japanese (Ozeki & Shirai, .  Suzuki, ), and Quechua (Courtney, ) either show no difference between subject and object RCs (the most common comparison), an object RC advantage, or mixed results depending on the methodology used.  Even though data from Basque, Chinese, Japanese, and Quechua suggest that there may be no universal subject RC dominance, comparing data from these languages directly with languages like English, German, and Hebrew can be problematic for two reasons.  First, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Basque are ‘head-final’ languages (i. e.  the RC precedes the noun that it modifies).  This means that RCs in these languages are structurally distinctly different from languages like English, which might explain the cross-linguistic differences in developmental and processing patterns observed between these two language groups.  Second, the comparison might not be warranted because, at least for some head-final languages (e. g.  East Asian languages), typologists have questioned whether true RCs actually exist (Comrie, ).  Finnish RCs, like English, German, and Hebrew RCs, are head-first structures.  Due to the highly inflected nature of Finnish, its flexible word order, and the distributional frequencies of RCs, the acquisition of Finnish RCs is relevant to the question as to whether all head-first languages show subject dominance.  Linguistic properties of relative clauses in Finnish, and their acquisition Finnish is a head-ﬁrst, nominative–accusative language.  Prototypically, a RC directly follows its head noun.  Finnish has three relative pronouns.  JOKA and KUKA, which often refer to animate entities, and MIKÄ, which often, but not necessarily, refers to inanimate entities (Hakulinen, Vilkuna, Korhonen, Koivisto, Heinonen & Alho, ).  This is similar to English speakers having the option of using that, who, or which.  Unlike English, but similarly to German, Finnish relative pronouns are inﬂected for case and number.  Relative pronouns are obligatory, and their case usually indicates what role the relativized element plays within the RCs.  The nominative predominantly expresses the grammatical case of subject.  the accusative, partitive, and, in some instances the genitive and nominative, express the object.  genitive expresses the possessive.  and the rest of the ﬁfteen cases are locative or marginal (Hakulinen et al. , .  Laaksonen & Lieko, ).  Indirect objects are expressed in the same way as oblique cases (i. e.  by using a locative inﬂection on the noun).  Examples ()–() exemplify subject, object, and oblique RCs.  () Kissakoiraalöi Cat-NOM which-NOM hit-past-sg dog-PART[OBJ] ‘The cat which hit a dog’ () Koirakissa[OBJ] Dog-NOM which-PART cat-NOM hit-past-sg[SUBJ] ‘The dog which the cat hit’ () Sohvakoira[OBL] Sofa-NOM which-ABL dog-NOM fall-past-sg‘The sofa from/oﬀ which a dog fell’Acquisition of relative clauses in Finnish.  A small number of previous studies have touched upon Finnish RC acquisition (e. g.  Kauppinen, .  Lieko, .  Toivanen, ).  However, to our knowledge there is only one past study focusing exclusively on early RC acquisition in Finnish.  Kirjavainen and Lieven () reported on a naturalistic corpus analysis of one Finnish child, Piia, and her caregivers’ data between the child’s ages of approx.  .  and . .  Piia’s earliest RCs (N = ) were subject RCs, which preceded any other RC structure found in the child’s data by several months.  This is consistent with naturalistic data from other nominative–accusative languages (Brandt et al. , .  Diessel & Tomasello, ).  Piia’s use of RCs clauses changed when she approached her third birthday.  At this point in development, oblique RCs became her most frequent RC structure (%), with subject and object RCs produced less frequently (each used in around % of all RC types).  Compared to other languages this is a fairly striking result (e.  g.  Keenan & Comrie, ).  For instance, English- and German-speaking children produce oblique RCs proportionally much less frequently (English.  %.  Diessel and Tomasello, .  German.  %.  Brandt et al. , ).  At least two factors can explain the discrepancy between Finnish and English/German children’s use of oblique RCs.  First, oblique RCs are the conventional way in Finnish to express many meanings for which Englishand German-speakers are more likely to use subject or object RCs.  see examples () and ().  () Minäbreak-ps-past sinisiä raitojaoli be-ps-past blue stripe-plural-PART sen kupin the cup-ACC which-INECorresponding English oblique RC.  ‘I broke the cup on which there was blue stripes’ Corresponding English subject RC.  ‘I broke the cup that had blue stripes (on it). ’ () Se tyyppimeThat person-NOM who-ALL we-NOM go-pl-prestoday Corresponding English oblique RC.  ‘The person to whom we will go today. ’ Corresponding English object RC.  ‘The person who we will go and seeConsequently, oblique RCs are more frequent in Finnish children’s input (% of RC structures.  Kirjavainen & Lieven, ) than in English (%.  Diessel, ) or German (%.  Brandt et al. , ).  This appears to result in quicker acquisition of these structures.  These distributional features of RCs in naturalistic child and caregiver Finnish would suggest that, in Finnish, oblique RCs are not more diﬃcult than subject (or object) RCs.  Thus, testing Finnish children’s behaviour in experimental contexts with subject, object, and oblique RCs could shed light on the question as to whether oblique RCs are universally more diﬃcult than subject and object RCs (e. g.  Keenan & Comrie, ), or whether the previously observed asymmetry/hierarchy has been created by distributional properties of those structures in previously studied languages.  Second, it has been suggested that oblique RCs are more diﬃcult than subject and object RCs because in languages such as English and German oblique RCs usually consist of a relative pronoun and a preposition, which either occur adjacent to each other (e. g.  German.  Das ist der Mann, mit dem ich getanzt habe, and English.  That was the man with whom I danced) or are separated by at least two words (English.  That was the man who I danced with) (Diessel & Tomasello, ).  Because in Finnish both grammatical and locative case information can be expressed by a single case-marked relative pronoun, in terms of lexical complexity, subject, object, and single-word oblique relativizers can be seen as being equally easy/ diﬃcult.  However, two types of oblique relatives occur in Finnish.  one-word oblique (henceforth oblique) RCs (see example ()) and two-word oblique (henceforth oblique) RCs (see example ()).  This feature of Finnish allows us to test whether oblique RCs are inherently more diﬃcult than subject and object RCs, or whether the reported diﬃculty of oblique RCs is created by the complexity of the oblique relativizer. on se sänkymissänukkui that bed-NOM which-INE cat-NOM sleptillalla evening-ADE ‘That’s the bed in which/where a cat slept in the evening’ minkä sisään() Toi on se sukkathat sock-NOM which-GEN in-ILL mouse-NOMkiipesi‘That’s the sock in which a mouse climbed’.  <Middle> The current research.  In comparison to many other head-ﬁrst languages, Finnish children hear and use an overwhelmingly high number of non-subject RCs.  This usage pattern, as assumed by usage-based constructivist theoretical stances (e. g.  Tomasello, ), should have a strong inﬂuence on children’s acquisition, such that Finnish-speaking children should be less likely to show a subject-advantage in comparison to children acquiring languages such as English, German, and Hebrew.  We tested these predictions across three studies.  Study  reanalysed Kirjavainen and Lieven’s () naturalistic data, focusing on one major variable that has been shown to aﬀect the distribution of subject and object RCs.  the animacy of the head noun.  Animate nouns make good agents, whereas inanimate nouns are typically patients (Fox & Thompson, ).  Accordingly, many studies have shown that subject RCs are more likely to have animate heads than non-subject RCs, which typically have inanimate heads (e. g.  Diessel, .  Kidd et al. , ).  We thus asked whether this is also the case in Finnish.  In Studies  and  we then investigated whether these distributional diﬀerences across diﬀerent RC types signiﬁcantly inﬂuence Finnish-speaking children’s comprehension and production of RCs.  STUDY .  CORPUS ANALYSIS. Piia is a monolingual first-born child in an upper-working-/middle-class family, in Kotka, southeast Finland.  The language used in her corpus is colloquial speech typical to the geographical area.  Piia was audio-recorded by her parents for approximately three hours per week between the ages of . · and . · (approx.   recordings, approx.   hours of data in total.  Kirjavainen-Max Planck corpus).  The interaction during the recordings was completely spontaneous, most commonly involving an interaction between the child and one or both of her parents (or other relatives) during meal times or play sessions.  After the age of .  her younger sister was often present during the recordings, although she rarely took part in the interaction.  The data was transcribed using the CHAT software (MacWhinney, ).  In the current study we include data recorded between . 