I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Cross-linguistic research is essential to theoretical development in language acquisition research, allowing us to determine universal as opposed to language-specific constraints on the acquisition process.  One structure that has received considerable attention in the grammatical acquisition literature is the relative clause (henceforth RC) (see Kidd, ).  In this paper we present three studies that investigated the acquisition of RCs in children acquiring Finnish, a language for which there is little data on RC acquisition.  Acquisition of relative clauses.  Most research on the acquisition of RCs has focused on age of acquisition and the level of difficulty children experience in naturalistic and experimental contexts with subject RCs such as (), object RCs such as (), and oblique RCs such as ().  () The dog that __ chased the cat.  () The cat that the dog chased ___.  () The dog to whom the boy gave the bone ___.  The general consensus amongst many scholars is that subject RCs are essentially easier to acquire than non-subject RCs, based on the following.  (a) subject RCs have been reported to emerge at an earlier developmental stage in naturalistic child language than non-subject RCs (e. g.  Brandt, Diessel & Tomasello, .  Diessel, .  Diessel & Tomasello, ).  (b) the majority of experimental evidence suggests that children perform best on subject RCs in comparison to other RC types (e. g.  Adani, .  de Villiers, Tager Flusberg, Hakuta & Cohen, .  Diessel & Tomasello, .  Friedmann, Belletti & Rizzi, .  Goodluck, .  Guasti, Stavrakaki & Arosio, .  Kas & Lukács, ), although more recently some scholars have noted that this effect appears to be modulated by distributional and typological features of individual languages (Arnon, .  Brandt, Kidd, Lieven & Tomasello, .  Diessel, .  Kidd, Brandt, Lieven & Tomasello ).  Even though there is general agreement on subject RC advantage over other RC types, there are several competing theoretical explanations for the effect, ranging from appeals to the primacy of subjects in syntactic derivation (either typologically.  Keenan & Comrie, .  or formally.  Rizzi, ), appeals to processing routines and memory capacity (O’Grady, ), and appeals to distributional frequency (Diessel, .  Kidd et al. , ).  These approaches often make very similar predictions and can be difficult to distinguish.  In the current paper we take a usage-based perspective, assuming that linguistic representations of structure are constructed on the basis of experience.  From this perspective we consider why, for Finnish, we do not observe a clear subject advantage in RC acquisition.  Subject–non-subject RC asymmetry.  The evidence for the subject–object asymmetry largely comes from a fairly narrow range of languages where RCs display distinct structural similarities (e. g.  English, German, and Hebrew).  In terms of RCs, these all are ‘head-first’ languages (i. e.  the RC comes after the (head)noun that it modifies).  Data from languages whose RCs do not display ‘head-first’ syntactic structure are less clear.  For instance, acquisition studies with children acquiring Basque (Carreiras, Duñabeitia, Vergara, de la Cruz-Pavía & Laka, .  Gutierrez-Mangado, ), Chinese (Chan, Matthews & Yip, . 