 1.  INTRODUCTION The process of recognizing spoken language extends beyond the apprehension of linguistic meaning and includes the identiﬁcation of who uttered the message.  This indexical of (Abercrombie 1967) recognition process affects phoneme categorization boundaries (e. g.  Johnson, Strand and D’Imperio 1999.  Hay, Warren and Drager 2006), the integration of talker identity and meaning (Van Berkum et al.  2008), and the implicit acceptability of grammatical errors (Hanulıkova et al.  2012).  We refer to the process of listeners categorizing speakers’ identities as indexical identiﬁcation.  Within sociolinguistics, the notion of indexicality is typically applied to speakers’ use of linguistic variants to project stances and group membership (Silverstein 2003), and not to listener-based processes.  However, we take the position that a speaker indexes their linguistic identity, at least in part, for the beneﬁt of a listener, and we care to understand the context under which a listener is sensitive to variation indexed in the speech stream.  What determines listener accuracy in indexical recognition.  Experience and familiarity with the relevant accents play an important role.  Clopper and colleagues have found that residential history affects regional accent categorization in the United States, demonstrating that listeners are more accurate at categorizing accents when they have had more varied accent experiences (Clopper and Pisoni 2004a, 2004b).  Clopper and Pisoni (2006a, 2006b) go on to show that dialect familiarity biases listeners’ responses.  Listeners are less likely to use labels for less-familiar accents, and more likely to use the local standard accent label (Clopper and Pisoni 2006a, 2006b).  The authors reason that the local standard accent (e. g.  the accent that is standard on a local or regional level, but not standard over a larger geographical distance) can serve as a default reference for accent comparisons.  While listeners often perform best with familiar voices and accents, the standard accent can elicit heightened performance (Clopper and Bradlow 2008).  Thus, geographic mobility has been linked to differences in indexical and linguistic recognition tasks, but mobility and connections within a dialect or speech community have been researched to a lesser extent.  In the present study, we focus on Metro Vancouver, an urbanity comprising the city of Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, and its surrounding suburbs (see map in Figure 1).  In the context of this multicultural and multilingual community, we examine how familiarity affects indexical recognition of voices from selfidentiﬁed Chinese, East Indian, and White Canadian speakers of English, as we take a ﬁrst pass at ethnolinguistic variation in Vancouver English.  Simply, our goals are to investigate.  1.  whether ethnolinguistic varieties exist in Vancouver, British Columbia, as measured by ethnic identiﬁcation accuracy of voices by na€ıve listeners. 2.  how listeners’ connections within the larger Vancouver speech community moderate their indexical recognition accuracy.  To contextualize these goals, the following sections brieﬂy overview previous ethnolinguistic research in Canada and the history of the three most culturally and demographically dominant social groups in Vancouver who receive our1. 1 Language and ethnicity in the Lower Mainland What is now referred to as the Metro Vancouver or the Lower Mainland was and is Coast Salish territory (McMillan and Yellowhorn 2004.  Suttles 1990).  The languages spoken in these communities include hən̓ q̓ əmin̓ əm̓ , which is the downriver dialect of Halkomelem, and Sk̲ wx̱ wu7mesh snıchim, also known as Squamish (Gessner et al.  2014).  After millennia as the homeland of the Coast Salish people, Europeans and their Canadian-born descendants moved into what is now Vancouver in the 1860s, the majority of whom were Anglophones of British ancestry (Macdonald 1992).  Chinese immigrants speaking Cantonese and related Yue languages also arrived around this time, as did Punjabi immigrants from South Asia (Nayar 2004.  Yee 2006).  The presence of Cantonese, English, and Punjabi has grown since then, and today Canadians from these ethnolinguistic backgrounds are the largest three demographic groups in the Lower Mainland.  Unfortunately, colonization has whittled the percentage of aboriginal Canadians in Metro Vancouver to less than two percent, and fewer than ﬁve percent of these individuals speak a First Nations language (Statistics Canada 2013a).  therefore, Coast Salish people and languages were not a focus of this project.  English is arguably the region’s dominant language due to its prestige and demographic presence.  English is one of Canada’s two ofﬁcial languages, and the British Columbia Language Education Policy expects all primary and secondary public school students to achieve proﬁciency in English (British Columbia Ministry of Education 2004).  Fifty-two percent of Metro Vancouver respondents on the 2011 Census listed English as their mother tongue, and 69 percent stated it was their most frequently used home language (Statistics Canada 2012c).  Despite French being an ofﬁcial language of Canada, less than two percent of Metro Vancouver residents are native French speakers or speak it regularly at home.  In contrast, the two most frequent responses after English for both mother tongue and most-often-used home language were Punjabi and Cantonese (Statistics Canada 2012c).  Approximately six percent of respondents listed Punjabi as their mother tongue, and ﬁve percent provided Punjabi as their most frequent home language.  These ﬁgures are the same for Cantonese.  In speciﬁc suburbs, these numbers are even higher.  Sixteen percent of respondents from Richmond reported that Cantonese was their mother tongue, and 14 percent said it was their most frequent home language (Statistics Canada 2012a).  Twenty percent of respondents from Surrey, another major suburb of Vancouver, said Punjabi was their ﬁrst language, and 16 percent said it was the language most frequently spoken at home (Statistics Canada 2012b).  Besides the large demographic presence of Cantonese and Punjabi in Metro Vancouver, there are other reasons to believe that Cantonese and Punjabi Canadians raised and perhaps also born in Vancouver may have their own ethnolinguistic varieties.  They ﬁnd themselves in a cultural limbo where they may struggle to be accepted both as Canadians and as members of their heritage communities.  In Vancouver’s early days, restrictive immigration laws, head taxes, and other discriminatory hurdles targeted Asian immigrants and Canadian-born individuals of Asian descent (Nayar 2004.  Yee 2006).  The postwar period brought more rights to Asian Canadians, spurring increased immigration (Nayar 2004.  Ng 1999.  Yee 2006).  Asian Canadians have since begun the subtler struggle to be respected as neither ‘forever foreign’ nor ‘honorary white’ (Hall-Lew 2014.  Tuan 1998).  Canadian-raised Punjabis and Cantonese have faced tensions with their ﬁrst generation peers and their foreign-born relatives, some of whom accuse them of abandoning their culture (Nayar 2004.  Ng 1999.  Yee 2006).  Evidence for this contemporary struggle for identity is apparent in the terms used to differentiate between individuals who are Canadian born and those who are not (Hall-Lew 2014.  Nayar 2012.  Wong 2014).  According to Sharma and Sankaran (2011.  402), ethnolinguistic variation may be used to ‘mark afﬁliation or to inscribe new social boundaries. ’ Using heritage-language2 derived traits (or more local innovations) in the majority language may allow locally-born Asian Canadians without heritage-language ﬂuency to preserve their cultural identity (Leung 2012).  In addition, communication motivates linguistic choices.  Asian Canadians must use English to participate in mainstream institutions for economic success, but staying in touch with ﬁrst generation immigrant family members and peers may require rudimentary knowledge of the heritage language or adopting a different variety of English to ensure one is simultaneously understood whilst maintaining cultural ties.  1. 2 Ethnolinguistics in Canada and beyond.  While descriptive work on English in Vancouver has focused on White speakers (De Wolf et al.  2004), several groups of researchers have explored the pronunciation patterns of Canada’s speech communities in an effort to describe the variation used by a range of culturally diverse groups.  Canadian research investigating ethnolinguistic variation in English has largely focused on production of one or two linguistic features at a time or a single phonological trend.  In general, studies showed either subtle, speciﬁc, contextlimited differences or none at all.  For example, Hoffman and Walker (2010) and Hoffman (2010) concluded that there are no ‘stable’ ethnolinguistic varieties in Chinese and Italian English speaking communities in Toronto, based on the fact that the lower rates of Canadian Vowel Shift participation and t/d deletion found in older Cantonese and Italian Torontonians compared to the British group did not persist for the younger generations.  Baxter and Peters (2013) did ﬁnd differences in t/d deletion between second-generation Black Torontonians compared to the second-generation groups of Hoffman and Walker’s study (2010), but only in certain phonological environments.  Boberg’s (2004, 2014) investigations of the Canadian Shift illustrated differences between Italian Montrealers on one hand and British and Ashkenazi Jewish Montrealers on the other, but these did not hold across all Canadian Shift vowels, and again sometimes occurred only in speciﬁc phonological environments.  How realistic is the search for a few speciﬁc markers of ethnolinguistic identity in speech production.  Clopper and Bradlow (2009) demonstrate that native listeners, who rely on differing constellations of overlapping features between speaker groups, are better at identifying speakers’ geographic origin than non-native listeners, who lack sufﬁcient familiarity with variation in their non-native language to ascertain how it may signal membership.  This suggests that experienced listeners exploit combinations and probabilistic co-occurrences of certain features to identify talker identity, rather than invariant sociolinguistic markers.  Moreover, individual talkers may vary their use of ethnically marked features depending on the situation, interlocutor, speech style, and a myriad of other factors (Benor 2010).  The previous studies on ethnolinguistic differences in the production of Canadian English may not have used suitable methodologies to capture subtle or variably realized interethnic linguistic differences.  Perhaps more importantly, it is not known whether listeners actually use t/d deletion or subtle changes in certain Canadian Shift vowels, for example, to index talker ethnicity.  Perceptually-driven studies may be a more sensitive way to uncover ethnolinguistic differences in the absence of timeintensive ethnographic participant observation studies.  Research outside of Canada exploring listeners’ knowledge and stereotypes about ethnolinguistic variation within their communities has demonstrated that listeners do indeed need multiple cues to index speaker ethnicity and also emphasized the role of familiarity.  Szakay (2007) found that listeners from New Zealand could identify the ethnicity of Pakeha (white New Zealanders of European descent) and Maori talkers with very high accuracy, but only when multiple cues were provided.  With only minimal cues, listener performance was not always above chance.  In these more challenging conditions, listeners who were more integrated into the Maori community performed better than listeners with low community integration.  Similarly, in a survey of the literature on listeners’ ability to distinguish African American and European American (White) talkers, Thomas and Reaser (2004) found that familiarity with a particular group enhanced identiﬁcation ability.  Thomas and Reaser also concluded that the cues used by listeners to identify talker ethnicity were inconsistent across studies, again suggesting that listeners do not merely use isolated features to index talker ethnicity.  They also proposed that different listeners might use different cues for ethnic identiﬁcation and emphasized that isolating the cues used by listeners can be methodologically difﬁcult.  The proposal that listeners may use combinations of features to index talker ethnicity was also echoed by Newman and Wu (2011), who investigated listeners’ abilities to identify talker ethnicity in New York City.  Listeners correctly identiﬁed Asian American talkers above chance, but less well than other ethnic groups.  The authors concluded that an Asian American English dialect does exist in New York City, albeit a less salient one than those used by African or Latino Americans.  Newman and Wu’s study, however, was limited by their small sample size.  Similar results were found by Hanna (1997), who found that listeners could distinguish the ethnicity of White and secondgeneration Asian American talkers from the Philadelphia area.  The Asian American talkers came from schools with relatively high percentages (13– 23%) of Asian Americans, which Hanna argues may have facilitated the creation of ethnolinguistic dialects.  Asian American listeners were not signiﬁcantly better at identifying Asian American talkers than White American listeners, which was argued to be due to the high proportion of Asian Americans at the university from which the listeners were recruited.  In other words, familiarity may have again helped listeners.  In summary, previous researchers have drawn different conclusions about the existence of ethnolinguistic variants in Canadian English.  However, international studies focusing on listeners’ perceptions have frequently found robust evidence of ethnolinguistic variation, especially when listeners were more familiar with talkers’ ethnic groups.  Listeners appear to rely on combinations of features to identify talker ethnicity, and perform less well when cues are minimized.  Speakers’ ethnic identities are not only selfconstructions but also projected onto them by society, and the latter may in turn shape self-identiﬁcations of ethnicity.  Our goal is to initiate the documentation and description of ethnolinguistic variation in Vancouver English.  Beginning with an attempt to describe the production differences across groups invites a perspective of phonetic and accent variation that is overly focused on single features, misconstruing the dynamic and complex presentation of group membership in speech.  So, we begin by exploring ethnolinguistic variation from a perception-focused perspective.  We test listeners’ ability to identify the ethnicity of speakers from the three most common ethnic groups in Vancouver, surmising that providing all available cues would be the most sensitive way to uncover whether speech production differences exist between talkers of different ethnicities.  By focusing on listeners and their accuracy in identifying the self-identiﬁed group membership of speakers, we are able to assess the role of social networks and familiarity on listeners’ abilities to accurately identify speakers’ ethnicities.  <Middle> 2.  EXPERIMENTAL METHODS.  2. 1 Talkers.  Thirty-seven talkers participated in the production study.  Talkers were 18–25 years of age at the time of the study and self-identiﬁed as native speakers of English or had acquired English by 6 years of age.  They had received education in English since kindergarten and were raised in Metro Vancouver since the age of 8.  These choices were made to (somewhat) control for language experience by ensuring English acquisition within a critical window (Werker and Hensch 2015).  Eligibility required ethnic self-identiﬁcation as Chinese, White, or East Indian.  Those who identiﬁed as White all reported English as their home language and all who identiﬁed as Chinese or East Indian reported Cantonese or Punjabi, respectively, as their heritage language.  In total, seven talkers were excluded from our study due to not meeting the requirements or technical errors.  The remaining thirty talkers were equally divided amongst the three ethnic groups with equal numbers of males and females in each group.  All talkers met eligibility criteria except two.  One of these was a male East Indian talker raised in Terrace, British Columbia, which is outside Metro Vancouver.  The other was a white female talker who also listed French as her home language.  These two talkers met all other eligibility criteria and were retained for use in the perception study, and their results were not outliers in any way relative to their groups.  Speakers and their age of English acquisition are provided in the tables in the Appendix along with other summary statistics.  2. 2 Production procedure.  The speech production elicitation methodology was a modiﬁed version of that used by Mok and Dellwo (2008).  Talkers were ﬁrst instructed to read the story ‘The North Wind and the Sun’, silently, to familiarize themselves with the text.  Next, they were instructed to read the story out loud.  They were permitted to read the story to themselves as many times as they liked, but they were only permitted to be recorded reading the story aloud once.  Participants were then presented with a silent video of the story (Leyer and Drew 1972) and asked to narrate the story as the video played.  we refer to this as semi-spontaneous speech.  Video narrations were chosen for the semi-spontaneous speech samples to balance ecological validity and control.  Passages were recorded using AKG C520 condenser microphone headsets.  Typed instructions, the story, and the video were presented using the software E-Prime or PsychoPy.  Upon his request, one talker held the microphone manually instead of wearing it as a headset.  All participants were compensated $10 CAN and were debriefed upon task completion.  2. 3 Listeners.  Forty-two 18–25-year-old listeners participated in the task.  They were all native speakers of English or had acquired English by age 6.  All listeners had received English as the language of instruction since kindergarten and had been raised in Metro Vancouver since age 8.  These choices were made to (somewhat) control for listener experience, while still reﬂecting the varied language backgrounds of the local population.  2. 4 Stimuli.  Talkers’ semi-spontaneous video narration productions were the stimuli used in the perception study.  Due to the semi-spontaneous nature of these productions, talkers produced a variable number of utterances.  The minimum number of sentences produced by a single talker was six.  For this reason, each listener was presented with six sentences from each talker.  Listeners heard stimuli from all thirty talkers.  thus, each listener was presented with 180 sentences total, excluding practice items.  Sentences from talkers’ video narrations were screened for use in the perception study.  As much as possible, sentences minimally consisted of a main verb and a subject noun, were less than two seconds in total duration, and did not contain extended pauses.  These criteria were selected to create more uniformity in the materials and improve listeners’ abilities to make perceptual comparisons.  Because some talkers did not produce enough sentences meeting all criteria, some criteria were violated.  Four sentences with pauses over two seconds were included, each one being from a differentIn order to account for the fact that many talkers produced more than six sentences, two sets of stimuli were created, with each set being presented to half of the listeners.  All stimuli were normalized for amplitude prior to use in the perception task to ensure audibility.  A practice block included sentences from a White female and an East Indian male whose voices were not included in the main experiment.  2. 5 Perception procedure.  Stimuli were automatically presented with experiment software and responses were made on a serial response box.  Participants were presented with sentences and asked to identify the talker’s ethnicity as White, Chinese, or East Indian for each sentence as quickly and accurately as possible.  We opted for these pan-ethnic labels, as we were uncertain that all listeners would be sufﬁciently familiar with the more speciﬁc terms like ‘Punjabi’ and ‘Cantonese. ’ Button assignment for talker ethnicity labels was counterbalanced across participants.  To quantify listener experience in the speech community, listeners ranked which group they spent the most time with – Chinese Canadians, East Indian Canadians, or White Canadians – upon completion of the task.  The ranking scale was from one to three, with one corresponding to the group they interacted with most, and three corresponding to the group they interacted with least.  Listeners were permitted to give groups equal ranks.  no listener ranked multiple groups as number one.  From here on, we use the term ‘(listener) network rank’ to denote the group a given listener ranked as number3.  RESULTS.  3. 1 Identiﬁcation accuracy.  Data were analyzed in R (R Core Team 2013).  Summary statistics for each speaker are shown in Tables A1–3 in the Appendix.  Participants’ self-identiﬁed gender and ethnicity are reported along with the mean percent correct classiﬁcation, the most commonly categorized ethnicity for each voice, and the counts of White, Chinese, and East Indian responses provided for each voice.  Table A3 illustrates that 9/10 white speakers were correctly classiﬁed as White with high accuracy.  Ethnically Chinese speakers of English, shown in Table A1, were generally categorized accurately.  7/10 speakers were categorized correctly.  Ethnically East Indian speakers of English were most erroneously categorized.  only 5/10 speakers were categorized accurately, as shown in Table A2.  Eighteen listeners ranked White Canadians at the top of their social network, sixteen listeners ranked Chinese Canadians at the top, and eight listeners ranked East Indian Canadians as number one.  This self-report is used and referred to as ‘social network rank’ in the following analyses of these data.  A series of t-tests showed that listeners of each network rank correctly identiﬁed talkers from each ethnic group at signiﬁcantly above chance levels (i. e.  > 33. 3% accuracy).  The results of these comparisons are reported in Table 1, and the accuracy results are visually presented in Figure 2.  Note that while listeners performed above chance, identiﬁcation performance was variable even within a listener for a single speaker.  Recall that each listener heard each voice six times in the experiment.  listeners provided the same categorization for a speaker only 41 percent of the time.  Listeners responded consistently with their own categorizations accurately 27 percent of the time and incorrectly 14 percent of the time.  This indicates that individual speakers varied in the degree to which they expressed their ethnic identity to listeners.  To assess how familiarity (operationally deﬁned as social network rank) affects indexical recognition, we conducted analyses of variance examining the effects of speaker ethnicity and listener network rank on identiﬁcation accuracy.  In doing so, we took into account variability between individual listeners, speakers, and utterances.  This required us to use separate ANOVAs with each model having identiﬁcation accuracy averaged for each individual listener, speaker, or utterance.  The ﬁrst ANOVA controlled for variability between individual listeners by averaging identiﬁcation accuracy scores within each listener.  These averaged accuracy scores met assumptions of normality and were thus used without transformations as a dependent measure with speaker ethnicity (White, East Indian, or Chinese) and listener network (White, East Indian, or Chinese) as independent variables.  There were signiﬁcant main effects of speaker ethnicity [F (2, 78) = 28. 06, p < 0. 001] and listener network [F(2,39) = 3. 63, p < 0. 05].  Post-hoc Tukey tests conﬁrm what is observable in Figure 2, suggesting that, overall, White speakers were identiﬁed signiﬁcantly more accurately than Chinese (p < 0. 001) and East Indian (p < 0. 001) speakers, and that Chinese speakers were identiﬁed signiﬁcantly more accurately than East Indian speakers (p < 0. 01).  Tukey test comparisons of listener networks showed no reliable differences in overall performance between the three listener groups.  The interaction between speaker ethnicity and listener network was, however, signiﬁcant [F(4,78) = 4. 44, p < 0. 01].  Listeners with predominantly White social networks identiﬁed White speakers signiﬁcantly more accurately than Chinese (p < 0. 05) and East Indian (p < 0. 001) speakers.  The difference in identiﬁcation accuracy between Chinese and East Indian talkers for listeners with White social networks was not signiﬁcant.  Listeners who reported Chinese social networks identiﬁed Chinese and White speakers signiﬁcantly more accurately than East Indian speakers (p < 0. 001 for both comparisons).  the difference between identiﬁcation accuracy rates for Chinese and White speakers was not signiﬁcantly different.  Listeners with East Indian social networks did not identify East Indian speakers with signiﬁcantly higher or lower accuracy than Chinese or White speakers.  They did, however, identify White speakers signiﬁcantly more accurately compared to Chinese speakers (p < 0. 05).  In the second and third models, identiﬁcation accuracy was averaged for each talker and utterance, respectively.  Accuracy data for the talker and utterance data was not normally distributed, so it was corrected with an arcsine transformation.  The transformed data was used as the dependent measure in these by-talker and by-utterance analyses.  There were no signiﬁcant effects in either model.  Practically speaking, this means that any effects of listener network rank or talker ethnicity were dwarfed by the high variability between individual talkers and utterances.  3. 2 Listener response bias.  Listeners’ errors can provide insights into the organization of indexical knowledge.  Tables A1–3 in the Appendix indicate how listeners categorized each voice for each social network rank.  In the rare event that White voices were miscategorized, they were equally likely to be miscategorized as East Indian compared to Chinese.  When Chinese voices were miscategorized, they were most likely identiﬁed as White, especially for listeners with Chinese social network ranks.  Chinese voices were very rarely miscategorized as East Indian.  White and Chinese social network listener groups were fairly split on how they mislabeled the East Indian voices, divvying up the responses roughly equally between the Chinese and White designations.  When East Indian social network listeners miscategorized East Indian voices, on the other hand, they were more likely to categorize the voices as White.  We analyze these response bias patterns using Luce’s Choice Theory model (Luce 1963.  Macmillan and Creelman 2005), which compares response bias ratios (i. e.  how much more likely was one response than another from the pool of possible response options) for pairs in a multiple alternative forced choice paradigm (i. e.  listeners in our study had three response options with which to categorize each voice) with biases calculated for each listener.  This method requires us to do a series of two-way comparisons, permitting an analysis of listeners’ biases in response patterns for each voice group in a pair-wise fashion.  In other words, we looked at listeners’ tendencies to identify and misidentify stimuli-response pairs.  Chinese and White voices as Chinese vs.  White.  Chinese and East Indian voices as Chinese vs.  East Indian.  East Indian and Chinese voices as East Indian vs.  Chinese.  and East Indian vs.  White voices as East Indian vs.  White.  For each stimulus-response pair, we.  1.  performed t-tests to determine whether the bias was signiﬁcantly different from 0 (where 0 is unbiased).  and 2.  used analyses of variance to determine whether listener network rank affected bias.  Figures 3–5 present density plots for the distributions of listeners’ bias scores, showing both whether listeners within a social network were biased in their responses (i. e.  where the peak of a distribution lies on the x-axis) and how much listeners within a social network group varied (i. e.  how wide or peaked a distribution is).  The bias ratio for Chinese and White stimulus-response pairs were analyzed in an ANOVA with participants’ social network rank as the independent variable.  No main effect of social network rank was found [F(2, 39) = 1. 46, p = 0. 26].  A one-sample t-test examining whether responses were different from 0 showed a strong negative bias [M=  0. 4, SD = 0. 66.  t(41) =  3. 94, p < 0. 001], i. e.  bias towards responding White.  Figure 3 presents a bias density plot by listener network rank.  This visualization shows the degree of response bias along the x-axislisteners in each self-identiﬁed social network.  Recall that 0 would indicate unbiased performance.  The y-axis shows likelihood of a response.  that is, the height of the distributions in the vertical space indicates the number of listeners whose responses place them in that range of bias scores.  The peak in all of these distributions is negative, indicating that there is an overall effect of White bias, but the distributions do span positive values, indicating some listeners’ biases to respond Chinese.  Listeners with larger Chinese social networks show a peak in the distribution close to 0, indicating that they were the least biased group of listeners in this comparison.  Two listeners (both with White network ranks) never identiﬁed a White stimulus as East Indian and three listeners (two Chinese-ranked and one White-ranked) never identiﬁed a Chinese stimulus as East Indian.  These participants’ bias calculations were therefore inﬁnite, and not included in the subsequent two bias analyses.  An ANOVA examining the bias ratio for the East Indian and White response showed no signiﬁcant effect of social network rank in the analysis of variance [F(2, 34) = 1. 