Human communication involves linguistic knowledge (grammar, lexicon, and sound structure), as well as knowledge about the context within which it is used (what can be inferred about the speaker’s intentions, etc. ).  This latter type of knowledge, pragmatics, has received considerable attention in studies on autism, and impairment in this domain is considered a core feature of autism spectrum disorder (ASD.  see Baron-Cohen, 1988.  Boucher, 2003).  By contrast, formal aspects of language (those concerning sound, word, and sentence structure) have been much less investigated in ASD, especially in languages other than English.  This is despite consensus among scholars regarding the existence of frequent formal language impairment in children with ASD (for overviews, see Boucher, 2012.  Eigsti, de Marchena, Schuh, & Kelley, 2011.  and Groen, Zwiers, Van der Gaag, & Buitelaar, 2008), though rates and underlying nature of this impairment have been understudied.  Recent work has brought this issue to the forefront in the context of the question of whether the language difﬁculties observed in some children with ASD are similar to those found in children with speciﬁc language impairment (SLI.  for a review, see Williams, Botting, & Boucher, 2008). 1 Moreover, it has been suggested that an “inverse” production–comprehension dissociation characterizes language in children with ASD, with comprehension difﬁculties overshadowing production difﬁculties (for a review, see Boucher, 2012), and persistence of comprehension problems constituting a signiﬁcant difference with SLI (Rutter, Mawhood, & Howlin, 1992), though the validity of this characterization remains unclear (Kwok, Brown, Smyth, & Cardy, 2015).  This paper aims to contribute to this inquiry with a study comparing children with ASD to children with SLI on alternative ways of forming wh-questions in French.  Our goal was to determine if production and comprehension of wh-questions show the same patterns of relative avoidance/preference in production and difﬁculty in comprehension in these two populations.  LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT IN ASD AND SLI.  According to the International Classiﬁcation of Diseases, 10th edition (ICD-10.  World Health Organization, 2010), both ASD and SLI are disorders of psychological development.  ASD is characterized by impaired communication and social interactions and by restricted, repetitive, and stereotyped behavior (see DSM-5.  American Psychiatric Association, 2013).  A large proportion of children with ASD also have intellectual deﬁcits.  Regarding language skills, there is considerable variation among children with ASD.  In addition to the well-known pragmatic difﬁculties experienced by children with ASD, some children also experience varying degrees of semantic, morphosyntactic, and/or phonological impairment (Lord, Risi, & Pickles, 2004.  Tager-Flusberg, 2006.  Wilkinson, 1998).  SLI is a disorder affecting language in the absence of any primary disorder such as intellectual disability, auditory/perceptual impairment, or obvious neurological dysfunction.  One language domain particularly affected in children with SLI is morphosyntax (Leonard, 2014).  Because morphosyntax may also be impaired in children with ASD, the question arises as to the extent, the nature, and the implications of the intersection between ASD and SLI (see Bishop, 2010.  Kjelgaard & Tager-Flusberg, 2001.  Tager-Flusberg, 2004, 2006.  Tomblin, 2011).  ASD-SLI studies that have sought to elucidate these questions through direct, comparative investigation of these two populations are relatively few in number.  These began with Bartak, Rutter, and Cox’s (1975) study, and the large clinical cohort studies undertaken by Allen and Rapin (1992), Rapin (1996), and Tuchman, Rapin, and Shinnar (1991.  for an overview and an integrative analysis of these, see also Rapin & Dunn, 2003).  These have been followed by a dozen other, smaller studies published in the last decade, which have also focused on English-speaking children (Leyfer, Tager-Flusberg, Dowd, Tomblin, & Folstein, 2008.  Lloyd, Paintin, & Botting, 2006.  Loucas et al. , 2008, 2010, 2013.  Pickles et al. , 2009.  Whitehouse, Barry, & Bishop, 2008.  Williams, Payne, & Marshall, 2013), with few exceptions (Demouy et al. , 2011.  Durrleman & Delage, 2016.  Geurts & Embrechts, 2008.  Zebib, Tuller, Prévost, & Morin, 2013).  Ultimately, identifying the nature of language deﬁcits that some children with ASD have could lead to the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc subgroups of children with autism, which in turn would contribute to better understanding of autism and the development of appropriate care.  The principal objective of this paper is to explore aspects of structural language in children with ASD in both production and comprehension, as part of the overarching goal of documenting language proﬁles in these children.  It has often been reported that children with ASD have higher abilities in expression than in reception (Boucher, 2003, 2012.  Charman et al. , 2003.  Lloyd et al. , 2006.  Rutter et al. , 1992), and these reports echo observations frequently made by clinicians.  In a recent review, Kwok et al.  (2015) found that the (few) studies directly comparing receptive/expressive modalities did not all show an advantage for production over reception, with some showing the opposite dissociation, and some no dissociation at all.  Furthermore, their meta-analysis of 74 studies reporting on either receptive or expressive language found no evidence for a typical expression-over-reception pattern in children with ASD.  This was true for studies of vocabulary, as well as for studies that included measures of global language ability.  However, Kwok et al.  underlined several important lacuna in the literature, concluding that the number of studies reporting measures of structural language made it impossible for them to run a separate analysis for this domain, and thus to determine whether there might be some kind of receptive–expressive dissociation for this aspect of language.  One of the major conclusions for their study was the need for further exploration of grammar and syntax.  Moreover, Kwok et al.  (2015) found that the participants in the extant literature did not form a representative sample, and speciﬁcally that low-functioning children were underrepresented in studies of children after age 6, making it probable, in their view, that language abilities in school-age children and youth might be overestimated.  The underlying assumption here is that it is reasonable to imagine that language should be more affected in children with ASD who have intellectual disability than in those who do not, and perhaps comprehension might be even more affected in children with this proﬁle.  If this is the case, then potential receptive–expressive language gaps may not have been adequately explored in these children.  It might further be supposed that, more generally, performance on speciﬁc aspects of language could be more affected by nonverbal ability.  A few studies have reported on difﬁculties in comprehension of particular morphosyntactic constructions, such as object relative clauses (Durrlemann & Zafferey, 2013), accusative clitics (Terzi, Marinis, Kotsopoulou, & Konstantinos, 2014), passives (Perovic, Modyanova, Hanson, Nelson, & Wexler, 2007.  Terzi et al. , 2014), and binding (Perovic, Modyanovs, & Wexler, 2013a, 2013b).  However, these did not all include children from the entire autism spectrum (some only included highfunctioning children), which suggests that the question of the relationship between nonverbal ability and language comprehension/language performance in ASD is still very much an open, empirical question.  The relationship between language skills and cognitive development in ASD has received attention in the literature.  Some studies suggest that children with ASD have language skills similar to typically or atypically developing children of the same cognitive level (Howlin, 1984.  Tager-Flusberg et al. , 1990).  others argue that linguistic deﬁcits in children with ASD may be speciﬁc, independent of their nonverbal ability (Eigsti, Bennetto, & Dadlani, 2007.  Kjelgaard & Tager-Flusberg, 2001.  Perovic et al. , 2013b).  These latter studies appear to go in the same direction as studies investigating SLI, which is, by deﬁnition, independent of nonverbal IQ, and so-called nonspeciﬁc language impairment, children with language impairment and low cognition, but no other developmental disability (see Rice, 2016, for recent discussion).  The question of a possible overlap between SLI and ASD is in this way tightly connected to the issue of whether low nonverbal IQ can be regarded as “the driver for language impairments in children” (Rice, 2016).  ASDSLI comparative studies differ in how this question is approached.  Some studies have focused on whether there are children with ASD who resemble children with SLI in having both normal nonverbal IQ and impaired structural language (Geurts & Embrechts, 2008.  Leyfer et al. , 2008.  Loucas et al. , 2008, 2010, 2013.  Riches, Loucas, Baird, Charman, & Simonoff, 2010, 2011.  Whitehouse et al. , 2008.  Williams, Payne, & Marshall, 2013).  Others have sought to document language proﬁles in verbal children with ASD, regardless of nonverbal cognitive proﬁles and to explore the incidence of structural language impairment more widely (Demouy et al. , 2011.  Durrleman & Delage, 2016.  Lloyd et al. , 2006.  Pickles et al. , 2009.  Rapin 1996.  Rey, Tardif, Delahaie, Thomas, & Massion, 2001.  Tuchman et al. , 1991).  We will be pursuing this second approach, bearing in mind, however, the possible inﬂuence of nonverbal ability, which will be directly addressed, as will the question of how ASD language proﬁles might best be explored.  SYNTACTIC COMPLEXITY AND LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT.  WH-QUESTIONS IN FRENCH.  In this paper, we address the question of the nature of structural language impairment, and, more speciﬁcally, of the reported receptive disadvantage in verbal children with ASD, by focusing on the complexity of syntactic computation in children with ASD.  Recent research shows that both typical and atypical language development is constrained by computational complexity, with more complex constructions emerging later than constructions involving less complexity (Chillier et al. , 2001.  Friedmann, Belletti, & Rizzi, 2009.  Hamman, Tuller, Monjauze, Delage, & Henry, 2007.  Jakubowicz & Nash, 2001.  van der Lely, 2005).  Among proposals that have aimed at characterizing particular aspects of complexity, Jakubowicz’s (2011) computational complexity hypothesis postulated that accumulation of the operations involved in linguistic computation, in particular internal merge and external merge, is quite challenging for young children and individuals with language pathology.  We focus in this study on this speciﬁc aspect of computational complexity.  Children may in effect avoid a complex structure by producing an alternative sentence involving fewer operations, or by adopting compensatory strategies, such as omission or substitution, which reduce the computational complexity of a derivation.  Computational complexity may also impact on comprehension.  A clear example is that of object relative clauses, which have been argued to involve a high degree of complexity, and are exceedingly difﬁcult for young children and for children with SLI, yielding subject relative interpretations, in comprehension, and, in production, alternative structures that are simpler, though sometimes inappropriate or ungrammatical (Friedmann et al. , 2009).  Wh-questions are a particularly useful area of French syntax for assessing computational complexity and its impact on language development, in that several grammatical constructions varying in complexity are available, from wh–in situ to wh-fronting with V-to-I movement followed by I-to-C movement (which we refer to by the traditional term subject/verb inversion), some of which are illustrated in (1), where wh-constructions are listed according to increasing complexity, and which are all ways of asking a question about the object of the verb push. 2 In (1a), the object wh-word qui “who” follows the verb pousses “push,” the socalled in situ position.  This matches the canonical verb–object order in French.  In contrast, the sentences in (1b)–(1e) all display the object wh-word qui in a preverbal position, which renders them more complex than the wh–in situ strategy in (1a).  Speciﬁcally, it is assumed that the wh-word moves from its base-generated postverbal position via internal merge to a higher position in the structure of the sentence (Chomsky, 1995). 3 A dependency relation is therefore established between the wh-word and its base-generated position, and it is precisely this kind of relationship that children with SLI are assumed to have difﬁculties with (see, e. g. , van der Lely, 2005).  Under this assumption, wh-questions with wh-fronting and subject/verb inversion (which involves a subject clitic), as in (1f), or wh-fronting and stylistic inversion (which involves a full lexical subject DP), as in (1g), represent the most complex types since they involve two internal merge operations.  that of the wh-word to the front of the sentence as well as that involved in the noncanonical order of the verb with respect to its subject.  I-to-C in the case of subject/verb inversion and overt movement of the subject to a position higher than SpecVP in the case of stylistic inversion (see Kayne & Pollock, 2001).  In these sentences, two dependency relationships must be established, which is particularly difﬁcult for children with SLI (see van der Lely, 2005).  As to (1b) and (1c), both involve wh-fronting, but (1c) is more complex than (1b) since it also includes external merge of a question marker est-ce que (ESK.  also part of the derivation of (1g)).  Jakubowicz (2011) argued that clefts ((1d)–(1e)) are more complex, as they entail both external merge (of the wh-word in the matrix clause) and internal merge (of an empty operator, identiﬁed by the overt wh-word).  Firthermore, (1e) includes a cleft construction and movement of the clefted wh-word, which makes it more complex than (1d).  Some of the interrogative strategies, wh–in situ, plain wh-fronting, and whfronting with ESK, are very frequent in spoken French, while wh-fronting with subject/verb inversion is much rarer (see Coveney, 1996.  Quillard, 2000, for some quantitative ﬁndings), but not altogether absent from the input received by children (see Prévost, Tuller, Galloux, & Barthez, in press).  In particular, it is part of highfrequency ﬁxed expressions (e. g. , Que veux-tu.  “What do you want. ”) and can be found in literature for children.  It is also associated with a more formal register, in contrast to the other strategies that are more neutral (although they can occur in formal contexts.  see Coveney, 1996.  Quillard, 2000).  Several studies on the development of wh-questions in French by typically developing (TD) children and children and adolescents with SLI (aged 3 years, 10 months [3. 10] to 14. 0) have shown that wh–in situ is largely favored in the earliest stages of acquisition, be it in spontaneous production or elicited production.  In contrast, wh-fronting with subject/verb inversion is extremely rare in the production data of young children and children with SLI (for typical development, see Hamann, 2006.  Hulk, 1996.  Hulk & Zuckerman, 2000.  Plunkett, 1999.  Strik, 2007.  for SLI, see Hamann, 2006.  Jakubowicz, 2011).  Studies on the comprehension of wh-questions in French are quite rare, and their objective has not been to compare performance across wh-strategies.  For instance, Plunkett (2010) looked at object versus subject wh-questions and showed, in different experiments, that object wh-questions with wh–in situ and with wh-fronting + ESK were well understood.  In patients suffering from agrammatic aphasia, however, van der Meulen (2004) showed that object questions with wh–in situ were signiﬁcantly better understood than questions involving wh-fronting.  Studies looking at both production and comprehension of other complex structures in French have generally reported low rates of production despite good comprehension, including in children with SLI.  Such is the case of object clitics, which appear in a (noncanonical) preverbal position in French (e. g. , Pierre la pousse “Peter her pushes”.  Grüter, 2005.  Jakubowicz, Nash, Rigaut, & Giraud, 1998.  see Jakubowicz & Tuller, 2008, for review of other such cases).  Some studies suggest that complex sentences are problematic for children with ASD.  For instance, Condouris, Meyer, and Tager-Flusberg (2003) found that interrogatives are affected in autism.  In an analysis of spontaneous speech of 44 individuals with ASD (mean age = 7. 3 and normal and impaired nonverbal IQ), they found low scores on the question/negation subscale of the Index of Productive Syntax, a measure assessing the child’s emergent use of particular structures (Scarborough, 1990).  Durrleman and Zufferey (2009), analyzing production data from two high-functioning children with ASD (aged 3. 9 and 5. 