Learning in any school subject depends on students’ proﬁciency in listening comprehension in academic contexts (Rost, 1994).  Classroom discourse has, for example, repeatedly been found to facilitate the acquisition of reading comprehension (cf.  Nystrand, 2006.  Wolf, Crosson, & Resnick, 2005).  Consequently, listening comprehension in academic contexts may be regarded as a basis for the acquisition of knowledge and academic achievement.  For the most part, communication in academic contexts is marked by a high level of “writtenness,” whether information is presented written or orally.  Academic listening texts possess characteristics of formal and planned discourse as they are lexically dense, context reduced, and characterized by textual structures that resemble those of written texts (Flowerdew & Miller, 1997).  Classroom talk may thus be localized at the interface of an oral–literate continuum where “oral” refers to prototypical speaking in everyday conversations and “literate” refers to prototypical writing in academic prose (Biber, 1995.  Tannen, 1982).  Although oral academic language is often less complex and contains fewer academic language features than written academic language (cf.  Corson, 1997.  Nagy & Townsend, 2012), oral and written academic language share important features, such as an informational focus and an abstract, impersonal style (Csomay, 2006).  Oral language in academic settings is therefore more complex and more difﬁcult to process than oral language in everyday conversations.  Accordingly, several researchers have assumed that everyday listening and academic listening comprehension may rely on different sets of subskills and have proposed deﬁnitions of academic listening comprehension and its components (cf.  Ferris & Tagg, 1996.  Richards, 1983.  Taylor & Geranpayeh, 2011).  Most of these deﬁnitions are based on the presumption that academic listening comprehension requires the listener to concentrate on as well as understand long stretches of speech without being able to use the facilitating functions of interactive discourse (Flowerdew, 1994).  For this particular type of listening comprehension, some authors propose speciﬁc comprehension subskills, such as the “differentiation between relevant and irrelevant information,” “command of strategies that support understanding (i. e. , taking notes),” “the ability to identify the topic, purpose and scope of a lecture,” or “making inferences” (e. g. , Buck, 2001.  Flowerdew, 1995.  Richards, 1983).  Yet it remains unclear how these skills may be operationalized and to what extent they are speciﬁc for listening in academic contexts.  To describe challenges of academic listening comprehension, it thus seems useful to resort to more general conceptualizations of academic language.  CHALLENGES OF ACADEMIC LANGUAGE.  The general differentiation between language skills needed to interact with others in informal contexts and those needed to understand school-related language has been addressed by various researchers (e. g. , Bailey & Butler, 2003.  Schleppegrell, 2004).  An important conceptual basis of this line of research was the distinction between basic interpersonal communication skills (BICS) and cognitive academic language proﬁciency (CALP) proposed by Cummins (1980).  According to Cummins (1980), BICS are deﬁned as the language skills needed in social situations.  When people interact with each other, their communication usually requires BICS because it occurs in a meaningful context and is thus relatively easy to understand and cognitively not very demanding.  In contrast, CALP is needed to understand language in context-reduced settings and is cognitively demanding, such as when abstract ideas or concepts are presented.  CALP thus primarily pertains to language typically used in academic contexts and can be deﬁned as “the extent to which an individual has access to and command of the oral and written academic registers of schooling” (Cummins, 2000, p.  67).  The differentiation between BICS and CALP served as a basis for further conceptualizations of academic language.  To date, there is no single deﬁnition of what constitutes academic language, and a variety of terms have been suggested to label the construct, such as “language of schooling,” “scientiﬁc language,” or “advanced literacy” (cf.  Snow & Uccelli, 2009).  The US-based National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing (CRESST) has developed a conceptualization of academic language that adds additional features to the CALP deﬁnition of academic language (Bailey & Butler, 2003).  According to this view, academic language can be deﬁned as “the language that is used by teachers and students for the purpose of acquiring new knowledge and skills, imparting new information, describing abstract ideas, and developing students’ conceptual understanding” (Chamot & O’Malley, 1994, p.  40).  On the content level, academic language is characterized by cognitively demanding school-related topics, such as lectures on abstract concepts or ideas (Bailey & Butler, 2003.  Eckhardt, 2008).  It is also context reduced to a certain extent.  the information conveyed is often removed from its immediate context (i. e. , there is a very limited amount of shared knowledge or context between speaker and listener.  cf.  Curenton & Justice,Academic language is associated with the mastery of speciﬁc genres, command of speciﬁc reasoning and argumentative strategies that are characteristic for academic domains (Snow & Uccelli, 2009), as well as with language features that pertain to speciﬁc cognitive procedures, such as generalization or abstraction (cf.  Feilke, 2012.  Gottlieb & Ernst-Slavit, 2014.  Heller & Morek, 2015.  Nagy & Townsend, 2012).  To convey these functions, it is characterized by a more sophisticated use of grammar and vocabulary than everyday language and requires the mastery of an extensive range of linguistic features (Scarcella & Rumberger, 2000).  On the semantic level, academic language is characterized by functional academic vocabulary (e. g. , synthesize and denominator) that students encounter at school but rarely in less formal social settings (Bailey & Butler, 2003.  Uesseler, Runge, & Redder, 2013).  English academic language has also been described as lexically dense and, on the syntactic level, comprising verb forms in passive voice, long and complex noun, and prepositional phrases, nominalizations, and participial modiﬁers (Abedi & Lord, 2001.  Schleppegrell, 2004).  During the last few years, a number of authors have also proposed taxonomies of academic language in German (e. g. , Feilke, 2012.  Gogolin & Lange, 2011.  Uesseler et al. , 2013.  Vollmer & Th¨urmann, 2010).  Morek and Heller (2012) offer a synopsis of the lexical, grammatical, and discourse features that have been described in these taxonomies.  According to this conceptualization, the academic register is characterized by the features described in Table 1.  For the most part, these features correspond to the language features that have been suggested as characteristics of academic language in English (e. g. , Bailey, Huang, Shin, Farnsworth, & Butler, 2007.  Snow & Uccelli, 2009).  Academic language in German and English is marked by a frequent use of the features described above, whereas these features occur to a lesser extent in everyday language (cf.  Bailey, 2007.  Schleppegrell, 2004).  Accordingly, several researchers have argued that texts may be located on a continuum, with texts containing everyday language and academic language features at the end points (Berendes, Dragon, Weinert, Heppt, & Stanat, 2013.  Snow, 2010).  However, to date it remains unclear whether understanding listening texts that contain predominantly academic versus everyday language features is associated with different cognitive processes and hence with different facets of listening comprehension.  several years of schooling in their L1 tend to acquire L2 academic language faster than younger children who did not attend school in their L1 (Collier, 1989).  However, even the academic language skills of advanced L2 learners may not reach those of L1 students (Mason, 1995).  CRITICISM OF AND EMPIRICAL RESULTS ON ACADEMIC LANGUAGE.  The differentiation between BICS and CALP proposed by Cummins (2000) has been criticized for a variety of reasons (for an overview, see Cummins, 2008).  The concept might be of limited practical utility (Scarcella, 2003) because it does not specify which language skills are encompassed in CALP (Snow & Uccelli, 2009) and thus may not sufﬁce to construct tasks and promote learning.  Given the absence of a detailed description of CALP skills, Edelsky et al.  (1983) propose that academic language is an artifact of the way it is measured and hence represents nothing but a form of “testwiseness. ” Furthermore, it is questionable whether everyday language is always contextualized and less cognitively demanding than academic language.  Persuasion, deceiving, or winning over others in everyday life, for example, requires cognitive abilities as complex as those needed to comprehend a persuasive argument in a social studies textbook (Bailey & Huang, 2011).  To date, only few studies have sought to differentiate academic language and everyday language empirically.  Evidence concerning the assumed differences between everyday conversational listening and academic listening is particularly scarce (Buck, 2001).  In Germany, ﬁrst studies are presently carried out to identify German academic language features on an empirical basis.  Most of these studies analyze language features occurring in German academic textbooks in the upper grades (Ahrenholz, 2013.  Ahrenholz & Maak, 2012.  Meurers, Berendes, Vajjala, & Bryant, 2015).  Furthermore, a current research project aims at establishing a corpus of the German language used in schools.  This corpus comprises transcripts of oral communication in German classrooms as well as textbooks and written texts by students in the primary grades (K¨ohne, Kronenwerth, Redder, Schuth, & Weinert, 2015). 