1.  INTRODUCTION.  This article seeks to put a spotlight on the roles of the body and materiality in language and gender socialization, a process that sociolinguists and linguistic anthropologists have traditionally argued takes place largely through language in interaction.  In keeping with this article’s appearance in the themed series, ‘Interaction.  Talk and Beyond,’ we present an analytic innovation.  the use of psychophysiological measures that represent the interaction between the physical and psychological aspects of brain and behavior.  The fields of sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology, and visual anthropology have a longstanding interest in the role of the body in interaction.  Discourse and conversation analysis have long been concerned with the fine-grained texture of interaction itself (Gumperz 1982.  Erickson 1985.  Tannen1984) and the delicate choreographing of physical components of the body with aspects of language such as intonation (Mendoza-Denton and Jannedy 2011).  However, we know relatively little in sociolinguistics about the psychophysiological facets of interaction.  Lab-bound research such as that with Event-Related Potentials (ERPs, small voltage events that occur in the brain in response to specific stimuli and are measured with an electroencephalograph) has long been taking place in psychology and psycholinguistics.  Sociolinguistics has only recently explored ERPs and eye tracking techniques to understand how socio-indexical information influences phoneme recognition as well as sentence and text comprehension (Beddor et al.  2013.  D’Onofrio 2015.  Pickering et al.  2004).  while other areas of linguistics are using MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) and ultrasound to understand, for example, articulation and its relation to phonological structure (Mielke, Baker and Archangeli 2010).  Sympathetic nervous system responses such as increasing heart rate, temperature, blood pressure, and electrodermal activity (EDA) are not currently exploited for what they might tell us in sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology or conversation analysis, and we believe this lacuna arises in part because of the perceived divide between field research and lab research that predominates in these disciplines, with most field sociolinguists considering psychophysiological measurement protocols to be too cumbersome and inhibitory of the naturalistic situations preferred for fieldwork and interviewing.  Here, we must recognize some exceptions in the reading and ESL ﬁelds which take advantage of the relative immobility of reading tasks to measure, for instance, the greater EDA response to ﬁrst vs.  second-language swearing and reprimands (Harris 2004).  There is no a priori reason for our discussion of the relation between language and the body to stop at the surface of the skin, especially given the current availability (indeed, ubiquity) of unobtrusive, portable devices.  As part of audience design, speakers have been shown to deploy ﬁne linguistic and gestural features to carefully ﬁt their language to speciﬁc interlocutors (Bell 1984), and they have also been shown to orient to such displays across multiple interactions (Kendon 1985).  In neighboring ﬁelds such as speech and hearing science, unconscious processes such as breathing have been shown to be tied to interactional events in laboratory situations (Hixon and Hoit 2005).  Within sociolinguistics, we are aware of the ways in which techniques of the body (Mauss 1973) participate in meaning making along with language, primarily through studies of gesture (Goodwin 2000.  Voigt et al.  2016.  inter alia), and through analyses of the body interacting with objects (Shankar and Cavanaugh 2012.  Mondada 2016).  Little attention has been paid as of yet to processes (such as those of the autonomic nervous system) which are largely outside of conscious regulation.  In contrast to sociolinguistics, the ﬁeld of videogame Human Computer Interaction (HCI) has a rich history of exploiting psychophysiological measurements to.  1.  analyze and improve user experience (Ballard and Wiest 1996.  Ravaja et al.  2008).  2.  operationalize the development of biofeedback videogames that rely on interactivity between users and their own biological output.  and 3.  evaluate and implement design choices (Kivikangas et al.  2011).  With regard to product evaluation, the insights resulting from studies of users’ physiological reactions can be employed by videogame developers seeking to quantify aspects of subjective dimensions such as fun, challenge, enjoyment, and boredom (Mandryk, Inkpen and Calvert 2006).  Video game user experience data can additionally elucidate not only individual responses, but also co-participants’ reactions to each other.  Despite difficulties in interpretation (i. e.  do increased heart rate, breathing or sweating have positive or negative valence. ), gaming researchers and engineers assert that psychophysiological measurement provides an ‘objective, continuous, realtime, non-invasive, precise, and sensitive way to assess the game experience’ (Kivikangas et al.  2011.  181).  Meanwhile in the field of quantitative sociolinguistics, the real-time tracking of linguistic consequences of discrete interactional events has enjoyed a surge of interest, particularly in so-called third-wave variationist studies (Eckert 2012).  Such studies often benefit from an ethnographic perspective (Podesva 2006.  Mendoza-Denton 2008.  see also Schilling-Estes 2004), providing rich context that aids in the interpretation of the effects of linguistic variables as they unfold in conversation.  But quantitative sociolinguists are not the only ones who have examined interaction as it unfolds.  in sociology, anthropology, language and communication departments, conversation and discourse analysts have a long history of being centrally concerned with the mutually constitutive nature of talk and action.  As Devyani Sharma observes, ‘interaction is at once fundamentally linguistic and inescapably interdisciplinary [.  .  . ] it creates momentary alliances of bodies, strategies, geographies, and various other signals and positionings’ (2016.  335).  Some of the questions we seek to investigate in this paper include.  • How does materiality of the environment, and especially culturally sedimented features of material objects, serve to structure the interactions of speakers in the world.  • How does gender ideology as materialized in objects affect interaction.  • How are these effects reflected not only at the interactional level but also in physiology.  Answers to these questions can help us to better understand the building blocks not only in talk and at the interactional level, but of gendered marginalization, building on analyses of face-to-face interactional literature such as Goodwin (2006).  The technographic ‘human x machine/tool interaction’ (Ferrin and Kontopodis 2017.  42) case study we present focuses on an interaction with a technological tool.  the Wii-mote, a motion-sensing wireless joystick/remote controller that can simulate the speed and intensity of player movements.  Such a technological artifact is not inherently weighted as masculinist, but becomes intensely so in the nexus within which the affordances of the game hardware and the interactions it propitiates – using the Wii-mote as a stand in for a phallus – serve to discourage and exclude the female player.  In our case, the result is gendered marginalization that takes place within the context of play, joking and laughter.  Thus, we can see how interactions during leisure activities surrounded by positive affect for some of the male players might simultaneously function to marginalize the female player.  And yet, such a use of the Wii-mote as a substitute penis is widespread.  Not only is Wii-mote the controller for one of the best-selling consoles of all time, but it has spawned a string of other games that exploit masturbation mimesis.  Wario Land.  Shake It.  We Dare (a critically underwhelming [Gibson 2011] banned-in-the-U. K.  swinger-avatar game that somehow achieved a 12+ age rating).  Even the current and much-hyped portable console Nintendo Switch has built-in games that earn ‘sexually suggestive’ ratings from review sites (IGN. com 2017).  2.  THEORETICAL BACKGROUND.  In this section, we briefly summarize four relevant strands of literature needed in order to make sense of the data we will present.  The literature on gaming environments for women and girls gives us a glimpse of settings encountered by female gamers.  The second section examines some of the conversation analytic claims about laughter (one of the main features we examine in the interactions we collected), and ﬁnally we discuss psychophysiology and electrodermal activity.  2. 1 Gaming and gender.  In her anthropological account as a participant observer in the World of Warcraft MMORPG (Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game), Bonnie Nardi (2010) provides an analysis of the gendered dynamics of video games, as well as a sobering review of the literature on women and video games.  She notes that many games include elements that are unappealing to women, such as ‘kombat lingerie [.  .  . ] hypersexualized female body types .  .  . ’ (2010.  166) and even off-putting scenarios where players must ‘run around ﬁnding gear to cover their nakedness’ (2010.  166) or operate in environments of ‘surly masculinity’ like the brothels in the game Neverwinter Nights (Mortensen and Corneliussen 2005, as cited in Nardi 2010.  165).  To further her analysis, Nardi relies on the use of the ‘boys’ tree house’ metaphor originally employed by Williams et al.  (2006), referring to a space that is assumed to be a boys-only safe space, where girls are by deﬁnition excluded, and which in some sense describes areas of gamer culture as a whole.  Much of our inspiration in thinking about gender is consonant with thinkers such as Michel Foucault and Judith Butler.  For our purposes, Butler (1988) contributes the notion of performativity, a stance in which gender is not ﬁxed, given or stable, but rather is continuously achieved through performance and repetition.  A related notion was advanced by Gail Jefferson (2004) who considered gender not as a given entity belonging to an individual, but rather as a career, a cumulative trajectory through which individuals play out all their interactions.  We follow Wysocki and Lauteria (2015) in understanding the videogame industry as analyzable through Foucault’s regimes of biopolitics and anatomo-politics (Foucault 2010 [1978]).  Anatomo-politics in this case can be used to consider how the prevalence of sexist language, imagery, and object reference in video games (for examples, see dorkly. com 2017) has resulted in a disciplining of the body, as well as an interpellation, a hailing (Althusser 1971) of women in video games as always/already constituted in degrading ways (Dietz 1998.  Fron et al.  2007).  To give a brief illustration, a recent Python developer conference was plagued by scandal when two male developers were ﬁred for openly making jokes about ‘forking’ and ‘big dongles’ within earshot of a female developer who chose to speak up and posted their picture online (‘forking’ refers ambiguously to both a sexual act and to the development of a new program from open source software, while a ‘dongle’ can be either a hardware connector or a slang word for penis).  The male developers denied interpellating the woman, claimed that they only meant ‘forking’ and ‘dongles’ in the technical sense, and apologized.  As most gender-related matters in the world of gaming though, the controversy was far from over.  the firings were followed by vengeance from Anonymous resulting in multiple DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service – an evil-minded attempt to make a server unavailable) attacks on the server hosting the woman’s blog (Brodkin 2013).  Yes, by now the terms ‘forking’ and ‘dongle’ have technical meanings.  Inescapable, however, is the sexist background from which these terms spring, and the double-entendre that the terms create and which can be covered up in plausible deniability.  The terms and the objects to which they refer are always already entangled with the history of their social naming.  Elsewhere (Mendoza-Denton 2016) we discuss the enregisterment of this gaming interpretation, and its circulation through social media.  The phenomenon of enregisterment, the emergence of recurrent patterns across registers, would be an example of an ideology in the making, an interpretant taking flight through post-mass-media networks.  And yet it is the entanglement between the game designers of Mario Party 8 (mostly male), the iconic function of the Wii-mote, and its use in a (purportedly family-rated) videogame that constitutes an in-group joke, a type of Easter Egg (a secret subroutine found in a video game that, if found, is meant to reward ingenuity on the part of the player), sent across time and space from the male designers of the game to the male players at the other end.  What is the point of the minigame under study then. 