I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Detailed research into the biological foundations of language in the context of growth and maturation – including babbling around six months of age to the production of full meaningful sentences by the age of three years (e. g.  Kuhl, .  Saﬀran, Werker & Werner, ) – has led some to suggest that young children have innate dispositions and incredible abilities to learn any natural language (Lenneberg, ).  Although newborns begin life with the ability to discriminate both native and non-native phonological contrasts attested in the world’s languages (e. g.  Best & Tyler, .  Eimas, Siqueland, Jusczyk & Vigorito, .  Polka & Werker, .  Streeter, .  Werker & Tees,their ability to discriminate non-native consonants and vowels gradually declines between  and  months as a result of consistent exposure to a speciﬁc language (e. g.  Best & McRoberts, .  Best, McRoberts, LaFleur & Silver-Isenstadt, .  Werker & Tees, ), whereas similar ability to discriminate native consonants and vowels are maintained and enhanced over the same time period (Kuhl, Stevens, Hayashi, Deguchi, Kiritani & Iverson, ).  The language-dependent perceptual reorganization during infancy with perceptual narrowing for the native phonological contrasts is considered to be largely attributable to ‘statistical learning’.  tracking the frequencies of the exposed sound tokens and using this information to tune into native phonological categories (Best & McRoberts, .  Kuhl, .  Maye, Werker & Gerken, ).  Such phonological contrasts of diﬀerent spoken languages can be divided into segmental units, including consonants and vowels, and suprasegmental units, such as stresses and tones.  Almost –% of the world’s languages are tone languages (Yip, ), and over half of the world’s people speak a tone language (Fromkin, ).  Many studies on infant tone perception have revealed that the process of perceptual reorganization is shaped by the ambient tonal language.  In one longitudinal case study, the perceptual discrimination of Cantonese tones was found to begin at the tenth month (Tse, ).  In another study by Mattock and Burnham (), infants were tested on their ability to discriminate Thai tone contrasts.  Results indicated that English-exposed infants demonstrated attenuation in tone sensitivity between  and  months, while Chinese-learning infants exhibited a sustained sensitivity to Thai tones over this period.  Moreover, developmental changes in tone perception were systematically explored by Yeung, Chen, and Werker ().  Their results demonstrated that language experience might affect the perception of lexical tones as early as  months.  English-, Cantonese-, and Mandarin-exposed infants each demonstrated different discrimination abilities that accorded with the properties of their native language at this stage.  This study suggests that the formation of tone categories evolves earlier than that for vowels and consonants.  What was previously regarded as a language-general stage of phonological development (from birth to  months) appears not to be so for infants with tone languages as their mother tongue.  Modern Mandarin is a tone language with relatively simple syllable structure (see Figure ).  Each syllable must be attached with one of the four lexical tones distinguishing different meanings (Tone .  high-level tone.  Tone .  mid-rising tone.  Tone .  low-falling-rising tone.  and Tone .  high-falling tone).  Lexical tones and nuclear vowels are compulsory elements for Mandarin syllables, whereas the onsets and the ending consonants are optional (Wang, ).  Hua and Dodd () systematically studied the production of Mandarin among one- to four-year-old children, reporting that children acquired phonological elements in the following order.  tones were acquired first, followed by vowels and syllable-final consonants, which were then followed by syllable-initial consonants.  The phonological saliency hypothesis (Hua & Dodd, ) might account for the order of phonological production in Mandarin, with Mandarin tones being the most salient.  Moreover, in a large-scale population-based production study with children aged two to twelve years (To, Cheung & McLeod, ), results also showed that tone production was early acquired, followed by vowels and then by consonants.  Earlier studies (e. g.  Chao, .  Clumeck, .  Hua, .  Hua & Dodd, .  Li & Tompson, ) have indicated that lexical tones are produced early, with considerable accuracy before age three.  Judgments of tone errors in these studies were typically made by native adult observers in a categorical fashion (correct or incorrect).  However, it is important to note that the aforementioned early production of tones in children before three years of age does not mean that these children have the same abilities of tonal production as do adults.  Innovations in speech analysis tools have afforded greater precision in the evaluation of early tone productions.  A series of studies (Wong, , . 