Prosody plays an important part in the production and comprehension of the organization of speech, manifested by patterns of intonation, rhythm, prominence, and chunking of the speech continuum.  Several form–meaning relations are established or contributed to by prosody, namely, sentence type distinctions, the highlighting of important information, the demarcation of speech units (also known as phrasing), and different kinds of affective meanings (Halliday, 1967.  Ladd, 2008).  Many prosodic form–meaning relations convey linguistic meanings, that is, meanings related to the message, such as interrogativity, ﬁnality, or focus, which may (or not) be grammaticalized in different languages and in different ways (Gussenhoven, 2002, 2016).  For example, interrogativity tends to be signaled by high or rising pitch, and ﬁnality by low pitch (as in English or Portuguese), but in Swedish a ﬁnal low tone is used both in statements and questions.  focus in West Germanic languages is typically achieved by the presence of a pitch contour in the prominent element (accentuation) and absence of accentuation on words that follow the prominent element, whereas other languages may use different types of accents to contrast focused and unfocused words (such as Portuguese.  Frota, 2014).  Other prosodic form–meaning relations express meanings related to the state of the speaker, such as the affective meanings of (un)happy or (un)cooperative, which tend to be less arbitrary and thus less language speciﬁc (Gussenhoven,Given the broad role played by prosody, it is not surprising that it has taken a leading role in spoken communication and language development.  Prosodic skills have been shown to be essential for language acquisition, and it is known that children have the ability to understand differences conveyed by prosodic features from birth and to use prosody to extract relevant information for lexical and syntactic analysis early in development (e. g. , Gervain & Mehler, 2010.  H¨ohle, 2009.  Morgan & Demuth 1996).  At the same time, however, certain domains/functions of prosody do not seem to be mastered in an adultlike fashion before puberty, such as prosodic comprehension skills involved in chunking, or the prosodic abilities required to understand or produce ﬁnal focus in English and Dutch (e. g. , Chen, 2011.  Wells, Pepp´e, & Goulandris, 2004).  Furthermore, prosody can be impaired in a large number of clinical populations with language or communication problems, such as speciﬁc language disorders (e. g. , Wells & Pepp´e, 2003), deafness (e. g. , Parker & Rose, 1990), Down syndrome (e. g. , Heselwood, Bray, & Crookston, 1995), Williams syndrome (e. g. , Catterall, Howard, Stojanovik, Szczerbinski, & Wells, 2006), aphasia (e. g. , Seddoh, 2004), schizophrenia (e. g. , Pascual, Sol´e, Castill´on, Abad´ıa, & Tejedor, 2005), epilepsy (e. g. , Sanz-Mart´ın, Guevara, CorsiCabrera, Ondarza-Rovira, & Ramos-Loyo, 2006), and autism spectrum disorders (e. g. , Baltaxe & Simmons, 1985.  Filipe, Frota, Castro, & Vicente, 2014.  Filipe, Frota, Villagomez, & Vicente, 2016).  It is important to note that although the functions of prosody tend to be quite general across languages, prosodic systems are known to vary considerably, and prosodic cues are strikingly language speciﬁc (Frota & Prieto, 2015a.  Jun, 2005, 2014.  Ladd, 2008).  Therefore, studies focusing on different languages are critical for cross-linguistic comparisons, which in turn are necessary for a better understanding of prosodic development and prosodic impairments.  These are strong reasons for prosodic skills to be more widely studied in typical and impaired language development.  European Portuguese (EP) poses challenging questions for the study of language development, due to the atypical prosodic proﬁle of the language.  EP includes properties of both Romance and Germanic languages in its phonology and prosody.  EP prosody combines typical Romance properties with Germaniclike properties.  Unlike Spanish, the rhythm of EP is characterized by a mix of syllable-timed and stress-timed features, thus combining Romance-like syllable timing with Germanic-like stress timing (Frota & Vig´ario, 2001).  EP displays a clear cluster of cues to signal the beginnings and ends of words, like English and other Germanic languages, but at the same time allows for ﬁnal word consonants to take the initial position of the following word (resyllabiﬁcation) as in Romance languages (Vig´ario, 2003).  The intonation contours of EP are characterized by sparse accentuation.  that is, they show fewer tonal events than in Spanish or other Romance languages, approximating the hat pattern contour characteristic of Dutch (Frota, 2014).  However, like Spanish, there is no deaccenting of the sort found in West Germanic languages when the prominence is not ﬁnal in the utterance (Frota, 2014.  Frota & Prieto, 2015b).  In addition, unlike in English, pitch accent placement is not the critical means to express focus.  In Romance languages several strategies may apply to convey narrow/contrastive focus depending on the language/variety, namely, the use of a particular type of pitch accent, sometimes with the presence of postnuclear accents, or changes in word order (Frota, 2014. 