1.  INTRODUCTION.  Place has long been cited as an explanatory factor for linguistic variation.  For instance, research in variationist sociolinguistics and dialect geography has demonstrated how language use across locales can reveal information about settlement patterns, contact, and sociopolitical developments.  Likewise, certain regional linguistic variants can tie a speaker to a locale, echoing that place’s particular history and development.  But individual places may have contested identities, resulting in varied views on what it means to be ‘from’ there (Modan 2007.  Becker 2009).  Moreover, speakers may have ties to more than one place, as the global population becomes increasingly mobile in contrast with the targeted NORMs (Non-Mobile Older Rural Males) of early dialectological research (Chambers and Trudgill 1998).  As sociolinguists work to improve our models of variation in situations of movement across dialect areas, factors relating to place orientation must be considered.  In this study, I employ ethnographic and variationist sociolinguistic methods to examine a white, working-class dialect in Greater New Orleans (GNO).  The linguistically conservative GNO suburb where this dialect is spoken, Chalmette, has seen large-scale displacement and reorganization since Hurricane Katrina devastated the region in 2005.  To better understand the effects of this movement on linguistic features tied to place, I analyzed the speech of both individuals who returned following the storm (returners), and those who relocated to a different dialect area within GNO (relocators).  Here, I report on linguistic data from 57 speakers, examining their rates of r-lessness, or variable absence of post-vocalic /ɹ/.  Results demonstrate that overall, (r) patterning cannot be predicted by whether speakers returned or relocated following the storm.  It is, however, predicted by a multi-faceted measure of place orientation, developed based on local insights after nine months of ethnographic ﬁeldwork in the area.  I propose, in conclusion, that sociolinguists consider including more complex measures of place orientation in models of variation.  Engaging more deeply with speakers’ orientation to the places they live(d) would make our models better able to account not only for situations of displacement, but also for situations of immigration, gentriﬁcation, and globalization that have formed the focus of much recent sociolinguistic inquiry (e. g.  Shin 2012.  Newlin-Łukowicz 2015.  Sharma and Rampton 2015).  As the ﬁeld has developed more ﬂexible ways of measuring and analyzing identity factors like gender/sexuality (Kiesling 2008.  Zimman, Davis and Raclaw 2014) and ethnicity (Benor 2010.  Nagy, Chociej and Hoffman 2014), this paper builds upon others (e. g.  Johnstone 2004.  Becker 2009.  Reed 2016) providing evidence that including nuanced treatment of place orientation as an identity factor in models of sociolinguistic variation can similarly improve our ability to account for the variation observed.  1. 1 Place and displacement in sociolinguistic research.  Several foundational variationist studies focus on place in terms of orientation towards local versus extra-local norms.  Labov (1972 [1963]) found that Martha’s Vineyard residents producing the highest rates of diphthong centralization were long-term residents that either lived in isolated parts of the island or expressed a strong desire to stay on the island.  Milroy’s (1980) analysis of working-class neighborhoods in Belfast demonstrated that speakers with denser social networks – those who interacted with the same groups of people across different spheres – tended to adhere more closely to local linguistic norms.  Finally, in Detroit, Eckert (2000) examined high schoolers she dubbed ‘jocks’ and ‘burnouts’ based on participation in school activities and desire to stay within the Detroit area.  While jocks attended more to extralocal linguistic norms, burnouts featured higher rates of local Northern City Shift features, indicating each group’s orientation towards local linguisticMore recent research has noted the crucial role of not only local orientation, but also place identity, in linguistic expression.  Johnstone’s work on Pittsburghese has shown that, as linguistic features become enregistered and tied to a given place (e. g.  Pittsburgh), they become available for performance and commodification, to demonstrate that a given individual aligns themselves with popular notions of being ‘from’ that place (Johnstone, Bhasin and Wittkofski 2002.  Johnstone 2009).  Of course, not all individuals from a given place agree on what it means to be ‘from there’.  Such conflicts about the identity of a locale can impact the linguistic strategies speakers use to construct a sense of place while challenging others’ ideas of their homeplace (cf.  Mt.  Pleasant in Washington, D. C.  [Modan 2007].  the Lower East Side of Manhattan [Becker 2009]).  In circumstances of displacement and migration, speakers’ relationships with places can become especially highlighted (Cotter and Horesh 2015).  Sometimes these relationships are framed in terms of ethnic identity, especially in the case of immigration and diaspora (Hoffman and Walker 2010.  Nagy, Chociej and Hoffman 2014.  Newlin-Łukowicz 2015).  However, in such contexts ethnicity, heritage, and homeland can become so closely intertwined as to be indistinguishable.  Most research on displacement and migration is focused on situations where speakers cross oceans or political borders, facing integration into a new community with an unfamiliar culture and tongue (e. g.  Schleef, Meyerhoff and Clark 2011.  Sharma and Sankaran 2011).  These sorts of L2 immigration contexts are fundamentally different from movement across dialectal boundaries within the same country, as issues of intelligibility and citizenship render these contexts hyper-salient for migrant and recipient community alike.  For this reason, examination of movement on a smaller scale – across dialect boundaries but not national boundaries, for example – can provide a clearer picture of the subtle ways speakers exploit connections between places and their associated linguistic features.  Geographic mobility in and of itself – even if speakers do not permanently relocate across dialect boundaries – has been shown to impact both linguistic production (Meyerhoff and Walker 2007.  Urbatsch 2015) and perception (Clopper and Pisoni 2004).  Moreover, the very existence of mobile speakers may highlight the ties between certain linguistic features and the places they are most commonly used, providing the opportunity for speakers to agentively produce variants that express orientation to one place or another (Johnstone, Andrus and Danielson 2006.  Hazen and Hamilton 2008.  Barnes 2016).  In second dialect acquisition research, linguistic factors are often the primary focus, and social factors, if included, are typically limited to time spent in different dialect areas, or occasionally social networks (Nycz 2015).  Such approaches do not account for personal agency in adhering to linguistic patterns tied to an identity a speaker values – such as being ‘from’ their original dialect area, or being an ‘honorary member’ of their new dialect area.  Degree of integration into the linguistic norms of a new location has indeed been shown to be dependent on intangibles, such as.  • desire to return to the homeland (Drummond 2012).  • development of positive relationships with individuals in the new speech community (Lybeck 2002).  and • awareness of certain linguistic features being tied to social capital (Solomon 1999.  Meyerhoff and Walker 2007.  Hazen and Hamilton 2008.  Cho 2012).  Thus, a number of extralinguistic factors influence one’s orientation towards homeplace versus new terrains, and also the ways those ties are expressed linguistically.  A goal in this study was to capture relevant factors that contribute to participants’ place orientation and to create a measurable scale of (extra-)local orientation that could be included in statistical analyses of variation.  Quantifying one’s orientation to certain locales is no trivial task, but similar indices for ethnic orientation have been successfully operationalized in the past.  Hoffman and associates found that Toronto immigrants’ answers to an ethnic orientation questionnaire correlated with use of certain L2 features and participation in regional sound changes (Hoffman and Walker 2010.  Nagy, Chociej and Hoffman 2014).  Fix (2014) and Newlin-Łukowicz (2015) used ethnographic insights to score participants according to their orientation to African American and Polish ethnic identities, respectively, finding that participation in regional sound changes differed for speakers who scored at different ends of the orientation spectra.  Though less established than ethnic orientation indices, there have also been attempts at developing multifaceted indices of place orientation.  Solomon (1999) used insights from ethnographic fieldwork in Valladolıd, Mexico, to quantify orientation to urban and rural locales.  the index proved predictive of /y/ realization in Spanish.  In his examination of Appalachian English in Tennessee, Reed (2016) used a rootedness metric borrowed from sociological placeattachment questionnaires (Williams and Vaske 2003) designed to assess speakers’ physical and emotional ties to their hometown, finding that rootedness scores predicted the variation observed better than traditional variables such as socio-economic status or social network.  The development of extra-Chalmatian orientation scores, described in detail below, uses ethnographic insights about speakers’ physical and emotional ties to their pre-Katrina home of Chalmette, quantifying place orientation in relation to social and linguistic factors that existed in the population before the storm.  2.  GREATER NEW ORLEANS.  SOCIOHISTORICAL CONTEXT AND ETHNOGRAPHIC INSIGHTS.  New Orleans was established as a French colonial outpost in the late 1600s, but has had diverse influences since then – African influences as a result of the slave trade, and Irish, Italian, and German influences due to the immigration of dockworkers.  These latter European immigrant groups created a distinct socio-cultural group, referred to as ‘Yats’.  In response to school integration in the 1960s, many Yats moved out of the city, resettling in suburban towns like Chalmette in St.  Bernard Parish, which had a separate school system from Orleans Parish2 (Campanella 2006).  Chalmette is now viewed as the epicenter of Yat culture and language (Mucciaccio 2009), with the term ‘Yat’ losing ground to the toponymic label ‘Chalmatian,’ demonstrating the centrality of locale to identification as part of this sociocultural group.  Used by Chalmette residents, the term Chalmatian indicates a down-to-earth and fun-loving resident.  used by outsiders it is a derogatory slur associated with classlessness and ignorance, reflecting the stigma of being from Chalmette in the eyes of many New Orleanians.  Modern-day Chalmette is a predominantly white, working-class community.  The town consists of many dense, multiplex networks of residents, with the tight-knit pre-Katrina community often described as ‘one big family’ (Justin, returner) in which ‘everybody knew everybody’ (JuAllison, relocator).  Although all of GNO has been slow to repopulate since Katrina, Chalmette was particularly affected, with a population decline of nearly 50 percent.  The majority of these displaced Chalmatians have relocated to other less affected areas in GNO, with about a quarter of them settling on the Northshore of Lake Pontchartrain (Lasley 2012).  The locations of Chalmette and the Northshore in relation to New Orleans are presented in Figure 1.  The Northshore was not a heavily populated area until the 1990s, and population numbers have continued to rise since then.  Popular perception on the Northshore places the blame for recent overcrowding on the post-Katrina arrival of Chalmatians, though census numbers reveal consistent population increases before and after the storm.  This misperception has resulted in tension between longstanding Northshore residents and Chalmatian relocators.  Relocated Chalmatians also face pressure from Chalmatians who returned to rebuild after the storm, due in part to local ideologies identifying the Northshore as the realm of the wealthy elite, which framed relocators as deserters.  Returner Bella summarized this opinion, saying, ‘you move to [the Northshore] and you think you’re high and mighty.  People like that, I don’t know.  Those are not Chalmatians’.  Yet many relocators expressed mixed opinions about whether they had fully integrated into life on the Northshore, or whether in contrast they were ‘true Chalmatians’.  Because of the strong ideological rift between returners and relocators, but also varied orientations towards Chalmette coming from both groups, multiple measures relating to place were implemented in this study to capture the wide-ranging influences on linguistic practices in this situation of displacement.  3.  R-LESSNESS IN GREATER NEW ORLEANS R-lessness is the variable absence of /ɹ/ in post-vocalic, syllable coda position followed by a consonant (e. g.  ‘card’) or word boundary (e. g.  ‘car’) (Nagy and Irwin 2010).  Within the United States, (r) has been studied in black and white dialects of English spoken in Detroit (Wolfram 1969), New York City (Labov 2006 [1966].  Becker 2009), Alabama (Feagin 1990), Charleston, South Carolina (Baranowski 2007), Boston (Irwin and Nagy 2007), and New Hampshire (Nagy and Irwin 2010).  In descriptions of New Orleans English, r-lessness is frequently mentioned as part of the distinctive local dialect (Rubrecht 1971.  Coles 1997, 2001.  Eble 2006.  Labov 2007.  Mucciaccio 2009).  Research from 1951 to the present demonstrates an increase in r-fulness over time, from 4–13 percent r-ful (Reinecke 1951), to 30–50 percent (Brennan 1983), and finally to 49–66 percent r-ful (Schoux Casey 2013, 2016).  Brennan and Schoux Casey found a tendency for lower rates of r-fulness amongst men and working-class speakers, but no significant difference between black and white speakers’ rates of r-fulness.  Both researchers concluded that r-fulness has become a prestige marker in New Orleans, fueling the change in progress away from r-lessness.  Chalmette has been identified as particularly conservative in retaining distinctive local linguistic features like r-lessness (Mucciaccio 2009.  Carmichael 2014).  For this reason, and because of the disproportionate levels of Chalmatian displacement following Hurricane Katrina, the current study focuses on the dialect spoken by individuals from Chalmette (henceforth referred to as Chalmatian English, though many of its distinctive features are shared with neighboring dialects).  Language patterns on the Northshore, where many Chalmatians relocated, are not clearly documented in the literature.  Recordings of Northshore residents reveal no evidence that Northshore dialects feature variable r-lessness.  <Middle> 4.  METHODS The data for this study were collected during nine months of ethnographic fieldwork in Greater New Orleans in 2012.  In addition to participant observation, I completed sociolinguistic interviews with 57 participants from Chalmette, and these are the focus of the linguistic analysis that follows.  Information about these speakers can be found in the Appendix.  Sociolinguistic interviews were recorded in WAV format with a Zoom H4 handy recorder and a Shure SM10A unidirectional headset microphone.  At the end of the interview, speakers were asked to read aloud from a reading passage and word list.  Fifteen to thirty minute segments of the conversational portion of interviews, plus the entire reading passage and word list, were transcribed and analyzed.  These three elicitation modes may be thought of as representing a continuum of speech conditions ranging from most monitored (word list) to least (conversational), though the recordings cannot fully capture the complex range of stylistic effects on speech patterns, and there are valid critiques of considering recorded interview speech as a participant’s default or vernacular form of speech (Wolfson 1976.  Eckert and Rickford 2001).  All tokens from the reading passage and word list were included in the coded corpus, along with the first 50 tokens of (r) in the transcribed portion of each interview.  A total of 8,290 tokens of (r) were analyzed (981 from the word list [~17 per speaker], 4,455 from the reading passage [~78 per speaker], and 2,854 from interview speech [~50 per speaker]).  Following research on (r) in North America, I coded the data impressionistically into binary categories by marking each token as either r-ful (r-1) or r-less (r-0).  Some researchers (e. g.  Hay and Maclagan 2010) have used F3 height as an acoustic measure of (r) constriction rather than relying on binary categorization as r-ful and r-less, though others (e. g.  Heselwood 2009.  Nagy and Irwin 2010) report mixed results with this approach.  In my coding, I used both auditory cues and visual indications from the spectrogram (i. e.  F3 height) in categorizing tokens of (r), to make use of acoustic information about constriction while retaining comparability with other studies of rhoticity.  As a check on my coding, two undergraduate interns from Ohio independently coded a sample of 400 (r) tokens across all three conditions (5% of the total corpus).  Inter-coder reliability analysis revealed 80 percent agreement between the three of us, with a kappa statistic of . 73, indicating good reliability (Clopper 2011). 