I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Detailed research into the biological foundations of language in the context of growth and maturation – including babbling around six months of age to the production of full meaningful sentences by the age of three years (e. g.  Kuhl, .  Saﬀran, Werker & Werner, ) – has led some to suggest that young children have innate dispositions and incredible abilities to learn any natural language (Lenneberg, ).  Although newborns begin life with the ability to discriminate both native and non-native phonological contrasts attested in the world’s languages (e. g.  Best & Tyler, .  Eimas, Siqueland, Jusczyk & Vigorito, .  Polka & Werker, .  Streeter, .  Werker & Tees,their ability to discriminate non-native consonants and vowels gradually declines between  and  months as a result of consistent exposure to a speciﬁc language (e. g.  Best & McRoberts, .  Best, McRoberts, LaFleur & Silver-Isenstadt, .  Werker & Tees, ), whereas similar ability to discriminate native consonants and vowels are maintained and enhanced over the same time period (Kuhl, Stevens, Hayashi, Deguchi, Kiritani & Iverson, ).  The language-dependent perceptual reorganization during infancy with perceptual narrowing for the native phonological contrasts is considered to be largely attributable to ‘statistical learning’.  tracking the frequencies of the exposed sound tokens and using this information to tune into native phonological categories (Best & McRoberts, .  Kuhl, .  Maye, Werker & Gerken, ).  Such phonological contrasts of diﬀerent spoken languages can be divided into segmental units, including consonants and vowels, and suprasegmental units, such as stresses and tones.  Almost –% of the world’s languages are tone languages (Yip, ), and over half of the world’s people speak a tone language (Fromkin, ).  Many studies on infant tone perception have revealed that the process of perceptual reorganization is shaped by the ambient tonal language.  In one longitudinal case study, the perceptual discrimination of Cantonese tones was found to begin at the tenth month (Tse, ). 