INTRODUCTION.  Much of the recent research in sociolinguistics has aimed to account for new phenomena in a globalised society to better understand processes of power and knowledge production (Blommaert 2010.  Coupland 2003.  Heller 2011).  Issues of translation have remained largely overlooked in ‘globalisationsensitive’ sociolinguistics research, despite the fact that decisions on what languages can, cannot or must be used, automatically entail consequences for translation (Meylaerts 2011) and ultimately for access to information, opportunities for knowledge production, and equity.  This article explores issues of multilingualism, language and translation policy in the field of transnational civil society.  I focus on one of the key actors in global governance, namely international non-governmental organisations (INGOs), as these organisations are important global workplaces in the new information- and knowledge-based economy (Castells 2000).  INGOs are organised differently from multinational companies and international governmental organisations, and are characterised by a humanist, nonprofit ethos (Rubenstein 2015).  Many large INGOs have recently undergone huge organizational changes, clustering into federations, associations and international networks, often with tasks from the traditionally Western-based headquarters being decentralised to the East and South (Bond 2015b).  Exploring language practices at INGOs is thus a way to capture some of the new phenomena brought about by globalisation.  By focusing on these issues at the international human rights NGO Amnesty International, this article aims to contribute to debates in a number of disciplines.  Firstly, in sociolinguistics and translation studies, the article offers an empirically-grounded account of language and translation policies in a global organisation.  It contributes to a growing body of research on language ideologies and multilingualism in NGOs and INGOs in the global political economy (Codo and Garrido 2010.  Kahn and Heller 2006.  Muehlmann and Duch^ene 2007.  Pujolar 2007) and on the sociolinguistics of globalisation (Blommaert 2010.  Blommaert, Collins and Slembrouck 2005.  Coupland 2003.  Heller 2011.  Maryns 2006).  Secondly, in international relations, development studies and political science, the article contributes to ongoing debates on the legitimacy of INGOs, the paradox between INGOs’ ethos and their often corporate management style, and INGOs’ efforts to bridge the divide between the global North and South (Demars and Dijkzeul 2015.  Lang 2014.  Rubenstein 2015.  Yanacopulos 2015).  Overall, I use the case of translation policies at Amnesty International to argue for the need to include aspects of translation in future sociolinguistic research, and for a general move towards more interdisciplinary research to help us understand new phenomena in the context of the rise of language work in the global new economy (cf.  Heller 2010), and of INGOs as actors in global governance.  TRANSLATION AS A SOCIAL ACTIVITY AND TRANSLATION POLICY.  In line with sociologically-oriented research in translation studies, I consider translation as a sociological act that is inherently linked to the agents that carry out translation work and who are inﬂuenced by the institutions in which translation takes place (Angelelli 2012.  Wolf 2007).  Translation here is seen as a site of struggle, over who decides what is translated, in what way, in what languages, and who decides what counts as knowledge, legitimate language, or good practice (Heller 2008.  109).  My work has been inﬂuenced by ethnographic research on translation in institutional settings (Abdallah 2012.  Buzelin 2007.  Davier 2014.  Van Hout and Macgilchrist 2010), particularly Koskinen’s (2008) ethnographic study of translation at the European Union (EU), and by linguistic ethnography more generally.  Even though little of the ethnographic research in translation studies identiﬁes itself as linguistic ethnographic, the two central assumptions that Rampton, Maybin and Roberts (2015.  18) describe as likely to be shared by linguistic ethnographic researchers are present in much of this work.  (1) language and social life are mutually shaping and the social context in which communication (or translation) takes place should be investigated rather than assumed.  and (2) the internal organisation of semiotic data is essential to understanding its signiﬁcance and position in the world.  I agree with Flynn (2006.  45) that a linguistic ethnography of translation would be ‘a logical follow-through of linguistic approaches to translation that have increasingly taken the context of translation into account over the last ﬁfty years’.  For translation studies with a sociological grounding, linguistic ethnography, and related approaches such as linguistic anthropology and critical ethnographic sociolinguistics, are appealing because of their (socio)linguistic ethnographic commitment to examining empirical processes in light of the material, realworld changes associated with globalisation, and their ability to challenge established categories (Duranti 1997.  Heller 2011.  Rampton, Maybin and Roberts 2015).  Linguistic ethnography speciﬁcally positions itself as an interdisciplinary region, and researchers from a variety of disciplines have identiﬁed their work as linguistic ethnography (Snell, Shaw and Copland 2015.  Tusting and Maybin 2007).  In this article, I add a translation studies perspective to this growing interdisciplinary body of research by combining a linguistic ethnographic framework with concepts of language and translation policy to foster links between micro-data and broader levels of the organisation and extrainstitutional context.  Drawing on Interactional Sociolinguistics, Rampton (2007) describes that investigating speciﬁc situated communication processes can be wide-ranging and that analysis often involves a variety of foci, such as.  1.  persons.  2.  situated encounters.  and 3.  institutions, networks and communities of practice. 2 In line with Hymes’ ethnography of communication, meaning-making is seen as arising in a specific context, as culturally framed and interactively constituted, rather than as a direct reflection of norms, beliefs and values of communities seen as a homogenous, structured whole (Gumperz and Hymes 1986).  Although these reflections are helpful, they do not take into account translation, either as a process or as a product.  I argue that translation, just as ‘speaking’, ‘is not just a matter of individuals’ encoding and decoding of messages’, but that translating, like ‘interacting’, is ‘to engage in an ongoing process of negotiation, both to infer what others intend to convey and to monitor how one’s own contributions are received’ (Gumperz 1999.  454).  Translation is a specific form of situated encounter, i. e.  a place where the translator and the institution come together.  The translator takes particular decisions based on values and beliefs that are contingent on the institutional setting in which s/he works and interacts.  These lead to a specific outcome, visible in the translation product.  In order to distinguish translations from situated encounters as speech exchanges between individuals, I propose to consider translations here as situated discourse.  This enables us to add a focus point specifically related to interlingual transfer, whether written or spoken.  Speaking of situated discourse emphasises the fact that the translations are shaped by and participate in shaping the context in which they are produced.  The three focus points (persons, situated encounters, and institutional frameworks) provide a link to the field of language policy.  Based on definitions of language policy (Spolsky 2004), translation policy can be defined as encompassing three components.  1.  translation practices.  2.  translation beliefs.  and 3.  translation management (Gonzalez Nu~nez 2016).  This definition not only captures formal elements of policy, but also informal aspects such as personal beliefs.  Spolsky (2004) emphasises that the same processes for decision-making which operate at the macro level also operate at the micro level.  policies at the national level interact with less obvious policies at levels below and above the nation state, including those of families, schools, religious organisations, the workplace, local government, and supra-national organisations (2004.  39, 55).  In line with this understanding, translation policy is considered as a complex social system, which we explore here in one particular institutional context.  Defining translation policy in accordance with Spolsky’s definition of language policy recognises the strong connection between the two concepts.  i. e.  decisions on language policy inevitably include decisions on translation policy (Gonzalez Nu~nez 2016.  Meylaerts 2011).  The three focus points for analysis described in Rampton (2007) and Gumperz (1999) could be conceptualised as the three facets of translation policy, i. e.  translation practices, translation beliefs, and translation management.  Translation products, then, can be considered as the culmination of translation policy’s three elements.  The integration of the concept of translation policy in a linguistic ethnographic framework can be visualised in a nexus research model (cf.  Koskinen 2008), as illustrated in Figure 1, where the object of study is put at the centre and the researcher uses all kinds of data ‘to grasp all the relevant connecting lines that form the net around it’ (Koskinen 2008.  2).  The nexus model helps in conceptualising translation as the product of a complex process involving.  a.  translators and other agents with their beliefs relating to translation.  b.  the institution with its own discourse, ideologies and representations. c.  situated encounters, or translation practices, as what happens on the work ﬂoor (cf.  Koskinen 2008).  The nexus model allows us to link approaches to multilingualism and translation to its wider socio-political context.  Translation policy and translation products ultimately have an impact on the representation of an organisation’s message and voice around the world.  In particular for Amnesty, the way in which its message and voice is translated will have an impact on whether or not the organisation succeeds in reaching out to citizens, in gaining media attention, in successfully lobbying governments, and eventually, whether or not human rights violations are publicly denounced.  The international human rights organisation Amnesty International has more than seven million members worldwide and has offices in about 80 countries.  The organisation’s roots go back to the ‘Appeal for Amnesty’ campaign that was launched by the British lawyer Peter Benenson in 1961.  The campaign was quickly transformed into a permanent international organisation, with Amnesty’s first meeting held in the same year and attended by participants from several European countries and the U. S. A.  London functioned as the organisation’s pivot point from early on, when Benenson opened an office and library there, later to become Amnesty’s International Secretariat (IS).  The organisation’s geographical reach and scope of work have grown immensely over the years.  Its original focus on Prisoners of Conscience gradually expanded, with a significant change in the early 2000s when Amnesty also started working on social, economic and cultural rights, including work on poverty as a violation of human rights.  The evolution of Amnesty is paradigmatic for the aid sector as a whole.  Carbonnier (2016.  60) points out that even in episodes of economic crisis, the humanitarian labour market has continued to grow rapidly.  INGOs today span almost every possible sector of human activity, many of them offering their services or working as advocacy organisations in the field of development, humanitarian intervention, or protecting the environment (Davies 2014.  3).  Yet INGOs have also been confronted with many challenges as part of globalisation, such as climate change, urbanisation, and demographic and geopolitical shifts (Bond 2015a).  With a stronger civil society being formed in the East and South, the legitimacy of Western INGOs has been increasingly criticised, with questions related to on whose behalf they are speaking and advocating becoming more mainstream (Anderson, Brown and Jean 2012.  Bond 2015b.  Crack 2013.  Lang 2014).  INGOs have aimed to address these issues in several ways, for example by increasingly working in partnership with local organisations, and by decentralising the powerful role of traditional headquarters based in the West.  This has been achieved through establishing global alliances, federations, confederations, and international networks (e. g.  World Vision International, CARE International, Family for Every Child), and for several large U. K. -based INGOs, by moving their headquarters out of the U. K.  and to the global South (e. g.  ActionAid moved its headquarters to Johannesburg in 2004).  These changes suggest that INGOs as transnational players need to confront the changing power axis in today’s globalised world linguistically as well.  Within Amnesty, discussions on how to become more global have been ongoing at least since the 1980s (Hopgood 2006).  Most recently, Amnesty has sought to address its claim to legitimacy as a Western INGO through its ‘Moving Closer to the Ground’ initiative, as part of which it has opened regional hub offices in ‘key capitals’ (Shetty 2016), including Hong Kong, Bangkok, Nairobi, Johannesburg, Mexico City, Lima, and Beirut.  These hubs assume many of the tasks of the U. K. -based International Secretariat, and allow Amnesty ‘to act with greater legitimacy, speed, capacity and relevance as we stand alongside those whose rights are violated’ (Shetty 2016.  para.  1).  These organisational changes of Amnesty as a political force and a global workplace entail the need for a different approach to translation and multilingualism.  Amnesty, as many Western-based INGOs, has traditionally worked from English into other languages.  Translation into Arabic, French and Spanish – languages that were identified as Amnesty’s ‘official’ and later on as its ‘core’ and ‘strategic’ languages – have dominated the translation budget for many years.  French and Spanish translation units were set up as part of the IS in the mid-1970s, and were decentralised as dedicated translation units in the mid-1980s, with an office in Paris and in Madrid respectively.  Around the same time, Arabic was added to Amnesty’s ‘official’ languages, with a small translation team based at the IS in London.  For translation into other languages, local offices were largely dependent on their own resources, and took their own translation decisions.  Amnesty’s language and translation policy was reviewed many times over the years, most recently in the 2000s as part of Amnesty’s efforts to move closer to the ground and to truly become ‘One Global Amnesty’, the phrase used in internal communication to refer to the restructuration plans.  The opening of hub offices implied new translation needs, into, and especially from other languages.  To cater for these needs, Amnesty set up a Language Resource Centre (LRC) in 2010, a virtual network that brings together the translation staff based in Madrid, Paris and London with other staff dealing with language and translation work in offices around the world.  The LRC aims to organise language services more centrally, so that fragmentation can be avoided and funds can be implemented more efficiently.  The decentralisation of decisionmaking and agenda-setting power away from the U. K.  thus led to the need for a more centralised languages and translation service.  Having federated and decentralised at various points in time over the last two decades, other U. K. -based INGOs are equally dealing with these challenges and new needs.  Oxfam launched its internal translation service in 2011.  Save the Children has employed a translations manager since 2006.  and Tearfund appointed its first translations editor in 2008 after decentralisation.  Apart from the apparent rise in language work (cf. 