INTRODUCTION.  This study has both theoretical and investigative aims, with the theme of this Special Issue providing an impetus to pause and rethink its potential contribution to knowledge.  In terms of theory, the aim is to contribute to dialogue about research in the global South, encompassing research on gender, sexuality and language and to do so while focussing on New Zealand’s idiosyncratic, unsettled ‘global Southern’ status (i. e.  New Zealand as potentially representing both ‘the North in the South’ and ‘the South in the North’).  In terms of investigative aims, this study queries masculinity performance in a classroom-based community of practice and its relationship with sexuality, colonial hegemony and heteronormativity.  Crucially for this Special Issue, Hokowhitu (2008) has pointed out in the context of New Zealand that gendered and sexual identity practices in the Paciﬁc region might remain incomprehensible to Northern epistemologies of gender theory.  In the present study, by primarily focusing on liminal moments instigated by young men who are New Zealand born Cook Island, Niuean and Samoan transnationals, I explore this possibility.  Empirically, the study aims to heuristically separate New Zealand from the global North as a provisional strategy for making processes of gender and sexuality visible that might otherwise be difﬁcult to perceive in the shadow of globalisation and Northern theoretical hegemony.  A corollary of this aim is to address issues of knowledge and power between New Zealand and less controversially ‘Southern’ scholarship in what is often referred to as ‘the Paciﬁc’ (Jolly 2008a).  Therefore, following other scholars in the region, for example research in Hawaiʻi (Chen 2014) and Vanuatu and the Cook Islands (Jolly 2008b), I align here with Hauʻofa (2008) in using the term ‘Oceanic’ to stress the connections and similarities between various experiences in different parts of the Paciﬁc Islands (or Oceania) instead of essentialising their differences.  The term Oceanic also captures the phenomenon of ‘world enlargement’ (Hauʻofa 1993.  6).  This term of Hauʻofa’s refers to a tendency for Paciﬁc Island peoples to outline their worlds based on the lines of exchange drawn between members of their extended families who live around the Paciﬁc Rim.  Besnier, researching in Tonga, has called these dispersed, kinship-based communities ‘transnational enclaves’, which he describes as being loosely organised networks that span continents and national borders (1997.  19).  This notion of world enlargement is a Paciﬁc perspective of globalisation in which Paciﬁc peoples occupy a world larger than the geographic spaces and the international boundaries within which they dwell (Wendt Samu 2010).  By incorporating Oceanic theories of interconnectedness and this Oceanic expanded view of the world, I can focus on how observed practices might challenge Northern-inspired theorisations.  Focusing on linguistic and discursive practices, the ultimate goal is not to essentialise observed patterns as post-colonial or Southern but rather to examine how local sociolinguistic systems in New Zealand and broader Oceania might articulate with or problematise Northern systems related to sex, gender, and sexuality.  This is not an attempt to eclipse indigenous scholarship or conﬂate it with non-indigenous theory from New Zealand (i. e.  in its role as ‘the North in the South’).  Neither is it an attempt to ‘hybridise’ indigenous critique with Northern theories and thereby hold my own critique up as superior to both (as cautioned against by Tuck and Yang 2012.  16).  Rather, it is an attempt to add a speciﬁc vantage point in a process for what Raewyn Connell (2014a.  539) has called ‘mutual learning and interactive thinking about theoretical questions’ and ‘creat[ing] spaces of theoretical discussion with many more voices and wider and deeper agendas’.  It is in this sense, here outlined, that I position this paper as an engagement in South-South dialogue, not to ‘indigenise’ non-indigenous New Zealand perspectives but instead in order to ultimately ‘talk back’ to Northern theory with an alternate voice.  SOUTHERN THEORY.  Connell (2007) has emphasised the need for South-South dialogue as an essential part of a critical project aiming to integrate knowledge systems from the periphery in order to resist a hegemonic relationship in which general theories are formed in the global North and the global South is mainly a locale to test those theories and gather data.  It is germane to consider how research on language and masculinity in New Zealand might appropriate the theories of the North whilst at the same time extending them in a symmetrical relationship (Rosa 2014).  Specifically, as Jolly (2008b.  6) suggests, I engage with Northern models of gender and sexuality while ‘bringing a particularly Oceanic inflection to the dialogue. ’ In the introduction, I suggested that New Zealand’s status as part of the global South is unsettled and controversial.  Some scholars (e. g.  Deumert and Lexander 2013) have questioned Australia’s inclusion in the global South presumably because Australia is a wealthy and powerful nation with academic traditions firmly grounded in (and contributing to) theory from the North.  However, in no way can New Zealand be considered a duplicate of its powerful neighbour to the west, despite continued membership in the British Commonwealth (indeed many incontrovertibly Southern nations remain members of that organisation, such as Seychelles, Papua New Guinea and Samoa).  In effect, New Zealand is continually peripheral to Australia’s antipodean ‘core’ and so any argument that New Zealand enjoys Australia’s level of influence is a difficult one to sustain.  Certainly, the Maori people of New Zealand, like the aboriginal people of Australia, are members of the global South ‘norm’ by most measures (as opposed to outliers).  Yet the Maori people have their own distinctive, and problematic, relationship with the nation state of New Zealand and its research (Tuhiwai Smith 2012).  In an effect referred to as ‘internal colonialism’ their situation is one in which they are outnumbered by the descendants of colonial settlers who have no North to return to.  thus it can be argued that global North and colony have become coextensive (Weaver 2005).  This indigenous sense of ongoing colonisation must not be collapsed into the South perhaps simply to end up perpetuating a problem outlined by Tuhiwai Smith (2012) in which the privileges of non-indigenous academics are upheld by leaving out the concerns and ways of knowing of indigenous peoples.  It is for these reasons that I question the fruitfulness and the ethics of conflating the ‘global South’ with indigeneity.  The Maori have been included at least symbolically in New Zealand from its first moments of independence, the Treaty of Waitangi between Maori and the Crown in 1840 promising the Maori status as British subjects, which was unusual practice in the empire at the time (Orange 2013).  Lieutenant Governor William Hobson proclaimed ‘He iwi kotahi tatou, we are now one people’ thereby instigating a relationship between Maori and Pakeha2 that is distinctive from the relationship between Maori and other peoples in New Zealand (MacLean 1999).  The Maori people have since resisted the assimilationism inherent in Hobson’s phrasing, but a focus on ‘two peoples in one country’ remains (Hill 2010.  294).  The distinctiveness and importance of indigenous perspectives under the Treaty of Waitangi, however, still allows space for the idea that the Tauiwi peoples (i. e.  ‘non-Maori’ of all races) of New Zealand have their own experiences of living and researching in a periphery.  To include Tauiwi researchers in a democratisation of the research imagination is not necessarily to argue for what Tuck and Yang (2012.  21) have called ‘settler moves to innocence – diversions, distractions, which relieve the settler of feelings of guilt or responsibility, and conceal the need to give up land or power or privilege’.  Rather, the goal is to remain cognizant of this mentioned need, continuing to pay close attention to indigenous critiques while trying to make a concerted contribution to the destabilisation of the current geopolitics of knowledge (instead of remaining tacitly complicit with them).  Thus, Manathunga (2011.  7) has called for scholars to make use of ‘the unresolved post-colonial tensions evident in our societies in Australia and Aotearoa New Zealand to .  .  .  create new spaces for Southern, Eastern and indigenous knowledges and methodologies’.  It is in this spirit of inclusion that I proceed with positioning New Zealand as part of the global South and frame this study as being in dialogue with ideas arising from ‘Oceanic’ scholarship while also keeping in mind that these same Southern ideas are in dialogue with the Northern-based theories that partly enable my analysis.  I propose that it is more useful to at least sometimes view New Zealand as Southern in tension with various indigenous Oceanic academic perspectives (e. g.  Maori, Cook Island, Hawaiian, and Samoan) as points of view in a SouthSouth dialogue.  I maintain that this need not be an inward-looking epistemology of New Zealand as indigenously Southern.  that is, it is not an attempt to re-theorise New Zealand as somehow unique or ahistorical and thereby to separate it from the inequalities of the neo-colonial world of today nor to isolate it from indigenous critique.  On the contrary, this in-between status that I propose is a way of exploiting the tension between New Zealand’s situated status as both marginally Northern and problematically Southern.  As a Tauiwi scholar myself, this positioning of New Zealand as simultaneously North-inSouth and South-in-North, and thus positioned at the margins of a space of shared theoretical discussion with indigenous perspectives, represents an uncertain site of vulnerability, but it is one that I embrace.  I do so in alignment with Milani (2014) who has asserted that by positioning ourselves, as researchers, at the margins, we can enable reflection concerning our contributions to knowledge.  As preparation for the coming analysis, the next sections outline briefly the history of Oceanic peoples in New Zealand, the role of ethnicity in schools, and the particularities of masculinity in New Zealand’s socio-historical context.  BACKGROUND.  PASIFIKA PEOPLES IN NEW ZEALAND.  Tangata Whenua, or the indigenous ‘people of the land’ – the Maori people – comprise about 15 percent of the population, and Tangata Pasifika, or Pacific Islanders – the people of Oceania – comprise about 7. 5 percent.  Both of these categories represent ‘umbrella’ terms that tend to invite deconstruction and contestation (Hill 2010).  Subsumed by the label Maori, for example, are the various distinctive iwi (extended kinship groups) that serve as the primary means of self-identification for indigenous people in New Zealand (Hill 2010).  Similarly, the term Pasifika subsumes people from diverse nations that are distinctive although very much linked by the Pacific Ocean throughout their history (Hauʻofa 1993).  The Cook Islands were annexed by New Zealand in 1901 and existed as a dependency of New Zealand until 1965.  Niue and Tokelau followed a similar course, though Tokelau remains a dependency today.  Samoa was administered as a United Nations trusteeship first by Britain (1914–1946) and then New Zealand until 1962.  In the mid-1960s, the bulk of the populations of the Cook Islands, Niue, and Tokelau migrated to New Zealand, already equipped with citizenship under ‘free association’, and Samoans began to migrate under a quota system that has been at times only loosely enforced (Smith 2012).  Since the beginning of this period of free association and somewhat open immigration quotas, the influence of Pasifika communities in New Zealand has steadily grown.  This change was primarily a result of their efforts to achieve economic progress and social inclusion in the aforementioned ‘one country two peoples’ model that had been negotiated in relation to the Treaty of Waitangi in its modern reincarnation.  Amongst the New Zealand-born population, identification with their parents’ homeland has widely varying salience, but due to the highly mobile and transnational nature of their kinship communities many have ongoing contact with extended family from their parents’ homeland and prioritise travel to those locales themselves where possible (Anae 2002).  This widely varying identification with Oceanic ethnic identities is evident among the participants in the current study to some extent, but it has been challenging to discern their ethnic self-identifications because of an overall reticence in the classroom about ethnic practices.  Such reticence serves as a demonstration of a colonial hegemony in New Zealand that enforces alignment with a levelling of ethnic differences (Shields, Bishop and Mazawi 2005).  There are certain domains in mainstream New Zealand schools (like Matangi College, the pseudonymous label for the location of this research) in which ethnicity is celebrated, such as cultural groups and their shows.  However, as valuable as these activities are in terms of improved school experience and attendance for Maori and Pasifika students (Whitinui 2008), in many mainstream schools these moments are mostly restricted to the practice room or the auditorium and do not necessarily translate into the presence of ethnic practices or positions in the classroom unless robustly supported across the curriculum (Savage et al.  2011).  Admittedly, my field work observations were restricted to the school grounds and to this specific classroom, limiting my ability to confirm the pervasiveness of this observed classroom reticence of Pasifika students (indeed everyone) about ethnicity.  MASCULINITIES IN NEW ZEALAND As part of the broader study of language use in a sexuality education classroom, gender was of great relevance, and here masculinity will be the focus.  In the colonial history of New Zealand, hegemonic masculinity has been and largely continues to be one that comprises a Pakeha version that emphasises violence, stoicism, heterosexuality, and a rugged sports-oriented masculine world (Hokowhitu 2004.  Phillips 1987).  As Hokowhitu (2004) argues, in a normative sense Maori men have largely aligned to this version since colonisation, as evidenced by the spectacle of the Maori sportsman, although of course embodying it to varying degrees.  Referring to this phenomenon as Maori men’s ‘consumption of Pakeha masculinity’, Hokowhitu points out that in the face of the possible extinction of their people, many Maori men ‘were forced to assume those masculine qualities that would abet their integration into the dominant Pakeha culture’ (Hokowhitu 2004.  269).  This was a process of appropriation whereby Maori men gained a certain masculine legitimacy via terms approved by Pakeha masculinity.  as Malcolm MacLean (1999.  23) has expressed it, ‘Maori men can never be admitted to this legitimate masculine world on terms other than those determined by its cultural mores.  They can be admitted as rugby players and as soldiers. ’ It is important to note that there is evidence of other masculinities that proliferated in Maori culture historically, for example nineteenth century photos of Maori men that show them demonstrating mutual physical affection by lazing on each other in open displays of caring (Hokowhitu 2004).  However, since colonisation such versions of masculinity have been subordinated by a patriarchal masculinity that is primarily an historical, colonial construct (Hokowhitu 2008).  My intention here is not to deny or obfuscate the pre-colonial history of the Maori warrior, for example, and attempt to replace it with some kind of monolithic, essentialised and softer version.  rather, the point is to emphasise that for Maori men (and indeed Pakeha men), a narrower field of masculinities eventuated from the hegemonic processes of colonisation.  In contrast with the colonial New Zealand, rugged, masculine norm, modern Pasifika men in other Pacific Island locales have been observed performing masculinities more in line with the nineteenth century Maori photos described above.  In Hawaiʻi, Tengan (2002) has contrasted Hawaiian men’s masculinities (a softer, sexualised version associated with Hula) with the Maori sportsman, and indeed warrior, which is usually associated with the Haka, or war challenge, made famous globally by the All Blacks rugby team.  He suggests that the Maori version is seen by his Hawaiian men informants to represent an ideal masculine image to strive for (although this stance is contested by many Kanaka Maoli women, as he outlines).  Again, the point here is not to suggest that men from other Pasifika societies never embody and/ or perform masculinities that include the sportsman spectacle.  obviously they sometimes do so, just as there are Maori men who embody and/or perform subordinated masculinities within the New Zealand context.  In fact, there are numerous rugby stars who hail from Pasifika communities.  Rather, the point is that a different array of masculinities has been more readily accessible to them.  For instance, Tengan is careful to observe that Hawaiian men have historically found other ways to subvert the perceived emasculation of the colonised in Hawaiʻi.  An example of this subversion is highlighted in the work of Walker (2005, 2008) in which Waikıkı surfers are seen to use sexual/romantic allure to bolster anti-colonial agency.  Sexual prowess in Hawaiʻi represents a different masculinity from that of Maori-Pakeha masculinity, and it is therefore important to the current study, for the Cook Island, Niuean, and Samoan boys are seen to ignore the local normative version at key moments.  Of relevance here is the work of Alexeyeff in the Cook Islands (2008), which has revealed that local and Western concepts of sexuality and gender are markedly different and come together with friction.  Sexuality is not central to masculinity in the Cook Islands, and indeed Oceania more broadly.  Therefore, for example, men who prefer to have sex with akavaʻine (i. e.  cross-dressing ‘men’ who tend to exclusively desire straight men) are not considered to be gay (Alexeyeff 2009).  These men’s social identity is based on public behaviour, and private sexual activity (opposite sex or same sex) does not factor in the equation because it must be concealed both from public display and public declaration.  If they act like straight men in public life, then that is what they are considered to be and a blind eye is turned to any ‘contradictory’ sex habits.  The akavaʻine, too, are defined by their gendered roles in the community (i. e.  they are girls, as they claim) rather than being defined by who they privately prefer as sexual partners.  Because of the transnational kinship networks between the Cook Islands and New Zealand and North America, these contrasts with Western concepts of gay and transgender are quite salient to people in these communities, and the contrasts are humorously played with (Jolly 2008b).  This tendency to combine local and global in relation to sexuality and gender is similarly the norm amongst Samoan New Zealander men (Park et al. 