 Passive voice is among the most prominent and widespread perspectivechanging constructions in the world’s languages (Abraham & Leisiö, .  Givón, .  Keenan & Dryer, ).  The acquisition of passive forms by children has been the controversial topic of research studies across the last decades (Baldie, .  Messenger, Branigan & Mclean, ).  Passive constructions have been described as delayed in some languages (Gordon & Chafetz, .  Prat-Sala, Shillcock & Sorace, ), and as early acquisitions in others (Allen & Crago, .  Aschermann, Gulzow & Wendt, .  Demuth, Moloi & Machobane, ).  Syntactic, semantic, discourse, cognitive, and usage factors as well as elicitation conditions have been invoked in explaining why young children struggle in comprehending and producing passive forms (Brooks & Tomasello, .  Messenger, .  Pinker, Lebeaux & Frost, ).  The current study aimed to examine the acquisition of passive forms in Hebrew in a new light.  First, focus here is on the MORPHOLOGY of the passive verb.  As general theoretical motivation for this verb-focused investigation, we follow Haspelmath’s (, p.  ) comment that “the verbal morphology associated with a passive construction is an essential part of the construction whose properties are worthy of study in their own right.  Indeed, the passive can be regarded as first and foremost a verbal morphological category whose meaning implies certain changes in the clause structure. ” From a Hebrew-specific typological perspective, studying passive verb morphology in acquisition is key, as Hebrew passive forms are part and parcel of the verb-pattern binyan system, a set of seven conjugations which provide the vocalic form of the verb and its syntactico-semantic category.  Second, previous research on passive acquisition – in Hebrew as in other languages – examined spoken passive constructions in young children, mostly in preschoolers.  In contrast, the current study elicited passive forms in writing from school-going children and adolescents, compared with adults, during the period of Later Language Development (Berman, .  Nippold, ).  This framework enabled us to contextualize the acquisition of passive verbs as part of a set of Hebrew morpho-lexical classes whose learning is delayed to adolescence – a time of when socio-cognitive, linguistic, and literacy abilities connect together in the complex expression of communicative goals (Berman & Ravid, ).  The main goals of the current study were as follows.  (i) to provide an account of the development of Hebrew passive verb morphology across the school years, based on an experimental task.  and (ii) to determine the role of derivational and inflectional binyan morphology in this development.  Passive constructions.  Passive voice seems to be a universal phenomenon.  nonetheless, it has been described as an elusive category, deserving of sound conceptual foundations (Shibatani, ).  Several conclusions come to mind when reviewing the linguistic literature on passive constructions and their functional roles across different languages, which can be useful in laying the background and generating expectations for the current developmental study of Hebrew passives.  First, passives are noted among the most prominent and widespread perspective-changing constructions in the world’s languages (Givón, ).  The general view of passive constructions as backgrounding the agent role while highlighting the patient role is shared among linguists (Myhill, ).  We adopt here Keenan and Dryer’s () analysis of the passive as essentially different from syntactically restricted inversion phenomena such as topicalizing and dislocating constructions.  unlike the former, passive forms are integral to the grammar of languages in occupying unmarked positions and the case marking of NPs, in requiring no specific intonation patterns, and in undergoing all major syntactic operations.  According to Keenan and Dryer, the most distinctive property of passives is the formation of the passive verb phrase (Haspelmath, ).  This supports our focus on the morphology of Hebrew passive verbs in investigating their acquisitional path.  A second observation from the cross-linguistic literature indicates that the notion of ‘passive’ often serves as an umbrella term for a cluster of constructions sharing the perspective of the patient.  Across languages, these include middle voice and impersonal constructions (Abraham & Leiss, ), in addition to get-passives, medial passives, and adjectival passives (Mitkovska & Bužarovska, .  Rathert, ), all participating in different configurations of agent and patient roles in the event.  Viewed from a developmental psycholinguistic perspective, passives constitute one form of voice construction whose function is to depict a non-canonical view on events and situations.  This can generate the expectation that a language learner would need to gain experience not only with variegated communicative events and contexts, but also with the array of agent-demoting constructions and discourse types typically associated with their expression in her language.  A third conclusion drawn from the literature is the strong relationship between transitivity and voice, on the one hand, and between aspect and voice, on the other (Abraham & Leisiö, .  Shibatani, ).  Middle voice constructions tend to express a generic and imperfective outlook, e. g. 