I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Distinguishing between declaratives and interrogatives is an important ability for language users.  In English and many other languages, interrogatives generally involve syntactic structures and word order patterns that are different from declaratives.  For example, in English the canonical ordering in simple transitive declarative sentences is subject– verb–object (Slobin & Bever, ), as in Anna likes chocolate.  However, this ordering is disrupted in the associated polar interrogative, which inverts the subject and auxiliary verb, and inserts an utterance-initial do, since no auxiliary is present.  Thus, Anna likes chocolate becomes Does Anna like chocolate.  Moreover, in so-called wh-questions, a grammatical phrase that normally occurs in the declarative form is absent, and its content is queried by a wh-word – e. g.  who, what, where, how, etc.  – that occurs at the beginning of the sentence (Whatt does Anna like ti. ).  (The t stands for ‘trace’, and represents the structural location of the constituent that is related to the wh-word that shares its index – in this case, the direct object of like. ) Similar kinds of word order variations occur in many other (primarily Indo-European) languages (e. g.  Dryer, .  König & Siemund, ).  In many prominent theories of syntax acquisition, children learn basic word order (i. e.  the relative placement of subject nouns, object nouns, and verbs) and morphosyntax by bootstrapping off of declarative sentences (typically transitive declaratives) and typical linkages between syntactic positions in simple declarative sentences and elements of the scenes they describe (Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz & Gleitman, .  Pinker, ).  Thus, given the differences in word order and morphosyntactic patterning of declaratives and interrogatives, distinguishing the two sentence types is crucial for correctly learning the syntax of both types of utterances.  Learning mechanisms that analyzed declaratives and interrogatives as the same type would result in cascading errors in syntax acquisition, since fundamental misanalysis early on would result in incorrect representations in learning as subsequent utterances are processed (Pinker, ).  Since interrogatives constitute close to half of the utterances in young children’s input, in roughly equal proportions of polar interrogatives and wh-questions (% and %, respectively.  Newport, ), understanding when and how learners start to differentiate interrogatives and declaratives is important for understanding grammatical acquisition more broadly.  One way of distinguishing declaratives and interrogatives would simply be to use the word order properties just described as a basis for segregating sentence types.  Indeed, -month-olds appear to be able to use word order information in just this way (Geffen & Mintz, ).  However, there is reason to doubt that infants could use distributional information of this type as the INITIAL source of information for discriminating sentences.  To see why, consider the kind of information infants would have to rely on if they did not already know the distributional properties of declarative syntax.  The distributional information involves a small set of highly frequent closed-class words (auxiliary verbs and wh-words) occurring in sentence-initial position.  While infants could classify sentences as interrogatives based on this property, it is hard to see how infants could discover this property a priori.  For one thing, if such a segregation is based on words rather than categories – i. e.  who, what, which, does, etc. , rather than wh-word, AUX – then it is not clear how to avoid segregating other sentences that are syntactically similar but differ in their initial words.  For example, such a procedure would create distinctions between utterances that start with determiners and those that start with pronouns, despite their shared underlying structure (e. g.  sentences like The boy saw the girl vs.  You saw the girl).  This problem might be avoided with knowledge of the syntactic categories (e. g.  wh-operator, AUX, NP), but it is not clear that infants have the requisite category knowledge at a point in acquisition where making sentence-type discrimination would be important.  Furthermore, even if infants did have that category knowledge, it is not clear how they would know to use those category distinctions – i. e.  wh-word and AUX vs.  everything else – and not other distinctions as a basis for segregating declaratives and interrogatives.  Indeed, being able to distinguish declaratives from interrogatives might be a prerequisite for successfully learning at least some of those categories in the first place, as well as their correlation with sentence type.  Thus, another source of information is likely to be necessary to make initial sentence-type distinctions.  There is reason to believe that sentence-level prosody provides just such an information source.  Prosody as a cue to sentence type Prosody consists of pitch, duration, and intensity.  Here we outline the potential role of these components in cueing sentence type.  Pitch.  In many languages, the final pitch contour is an important perceptual cue for sentence-type discrimination (American English.  Săfárŏvá & Swerts, .  Castilian Spanish.  Face, .  French.  Vion & Colas, ).  In adult-directed speech, polar interrogatives typically end with a final rise in pitch, while declaratives end with final flat or falling intonation (Bartels, .  Hedberg, Sosa & Fadden, .  Ladd, ), although there are some exceptions (e. g.  Belfast English.  Jarman & Cruttenden, .  Chickasaw.  Gordon, ).  The same is true of declarative questions, which differ from declarative statements only in prosody (e. g.  Anna likes chocolate. ).  If speech to infants is similarly organized, prosody could provide a robust tool for initially distinguishing sentence types.  Perceptual studies have demonstrated that, while the exact cues adults use to distinguish between declaratives and interrogatives may vary by language, most languages rely on some form of pitch cue (e. g.  Gussenhoven & Chen, ).  For example, although Russian has wh-words, sentences often do not include lexical or syntactic/grammatical indicators of sentence type (Makarova, ).  Russian has relatively free word order and no auxiliary verbs (Rojina, ), so listeners rely on pitch peak alignment rather than lexical cues to perceive distinctions between declaratives and polar interrogatives (Makarova, .  Svetozarova, ). 