INTRODUCTION.  The acquisition of heritage languages, i. e.  minority languages acquired in a migration context, has been a matter of debate in recent literature.  Heritage speakers (HSs) acquire two (or more) languages in childhood and thus the acquisition of a heritage language (HL) is an instance of bilingual acquisition.  HSs are either simultaneous bilinguals, if they are exposed to the minority and the majority language from birth, or successive bilinguals, if contact with the majority language occurs after extensive exposure to the family (heritage) language.  In either case, the age of onset of acquisition (AOA) of the HL is similar to monolinguals.  Nonetheless, a HL is defined by becoming a non-dominant language when the speakers start schooling and the amount of input and continued language use radically decreases for the HL (Rothman, ).  As a result, HSs’ linguistic performance became a fertile ground of inquiry, namely allowing researchers to discuss to what extent the steady state of linguistic knowledge ultimately attained by those speakers corresponds to what is attained by monolingual speakers (see the discussion in Montrul, .  Rothman, ).  When divergence between monolingual and HL acquisition is identified, different explanations have been put forward, namely incomplete development or language attrition (Montrul, .  Polinsky, ), or explanations relating to the quality of the input (Pascual y Cabo & Rothman, .  Pires & Rothman, ).  Other studies highlight the nature of the linguistic property under evaluation, with later-acquired structures showing a more deficient acquisition than early-acquired properties (Flores & Barbosa, .  Santos & Flores, ).  Later-acquired properties are expected to be acquired at an age (school age) in which the child gets reduced input from his/her HL, since the majority language is now the child’s dominant language.  It is true, in general, that children vary in the amount of exposure that they have to their ambient language(s).  This has been shown to be the case not only for children who grow up with two ambient languages, but also for L input in typical monolingual acquisition settings across families and across different language communities (Hart & Risley, .  Hoff, .  Hurtado, Marchman & Fernald, ).  Even innatism, which relativizes the role of input in grammatical development (e. g.  Wexler, ), presupposes a minimal amount of exposure to primary linguistic data in order to activate the language acquisition device.  There has to be a minimal threshold of exposure responsible for triggering acquisition.  Limited exposure below this supposed baseline may trigger comprehension and perception skills, but not productive ones, as seems to be the case with ‘overhearers’ (Au, Knightly, Jun & Oh, ).  It has indeed been shown that restricted input to one language in bilingual acquisition settings influences the development of lexical knowledge (Bialystok & Luk, .  Hoff & Naigles, .  Thordardottir, ), pronunciation (Kupisch, Barton, Klaschik, Lein, Stangen & van de Weijer, ) and morphosyntactic knowledge (Gathercole & Thomas, .  Rodina & Westergaard, .  Unsworth, Argyri, Cornips, Hulk, Sorace & Tsimpli, ).  However, more studies are needed in order to determine to what extent the quantity of input may limit the acquisition of different areas of grammar.  Many studies showing input effects in bilingual acquisition focus on early successive bilinguals, and measure the effects of length of exposure to the target language, which interacts with the age of onset (see discussion in Unsworth, ).  In this paper, and by studying the acquisition of a HL, we intend to evaluate the effects of the amount of input, in an acquisition setting in which the age of onset is similar to that of monolinguals.  In this case, we will evaluate the quantity of input through indirect measures focused on children’s families, namely considering households with first- or second-generation parents and the existence of older siblings.  Particularly, we evaluate the effect of the amount of input in the acquisition of mood selection in complement clauses, a matter of semantics that interacts with the lexicon (lexical semantics of the matrix verb) and syntax (of complement clauses).  The study is based on European Portuguese (EP) acquired as a HL by children and adolescent speakers whose dominant language is German.  Most HL studies test adult HSs and therefore cannot distinguish effects of acquisition from effects of subsequent language attrition.  In this study, we test individuals who are still acquiring the property at stake.  Since use of the subjunctive mood has been shown to stabilize late, we take into account a large age span (six–sixteen years of age at the moment of testing) and adopt a cross-sectional approach, which will allow us to infer a scale of acquisition.  HSs’ results will be compared to previous results from a study on monolingual acquisition of the EP subjunctive (Jesus, ), in terms of both the scale and the rate of acquisition (we will therefore look at age).  When discussing age, we will confirm the relevancy of certain age thresholds identified in preceding work on language acquisition and language attrition.  Additionally, we tested eight adult HSs, who represent the ultimate attainment of HL acquisition.  INPUT EFFECTS AND THE ACQUISITION OF A HERITAGE LANGUAGE.  The effects of limited exposure to primary linguistic data have attracted recent attention in the study of bilingual acquisition (see, e. g.  Grüter & Paradis, ).  It has been suggested that restricted input to one language in bilingual acquisition settings may influence the development of different linguistic domains, e. g.  vocabulary size (Hoff, Core, Place, Rumiche, Senor & Parra, ) or morphosyntactic development (Austin, .  Blom, .  Gathercole, .  Gathercole & Thomas, .  Hoff et al. , .  Rodina & Westergaard, .  Schlyter, .  Suchtelen, .  Thomas, Williams, Jones, Davies & Binks, .  Unsworth, .  Unsworth et al. , .  among many others).  Schlyter () and Blom (), for instance, claim that bilingual children with very unbalanced language input develop a ‘weaker language’, displaying a slower rate of acquisition and structural transfer from the stronger language.  The stronger (ambient) language, on the other hand, seems to develop indistinguishably from that of monolingual children of the same language background.  As Meisel () points out, the hypothesis of a weaker language suggests that exposure since birth is a necessary but not sufficient condition for native-like language acquisition.  This seems to suggest that sufficient exposure to the primary linguistic data must happen at the appropriate age in order to be successful.  Several studies argue in favour of this idea.  Gathercole (), Gathercole and Thomas (), and Thomas et al.  (), for instance, show that the grammatical development of the minority language (Welsh, in their case) depends on the amount of exposure to this language at home and in school.  Several other studies, which include parental input as an extralinguistic variable, reach similar conclusions (e. g.  Rodina & Westergard, .  Suchtelen, ).  Rodina and Westergard (), who analyze the acquisition of gender, show that Norwegian–Russian bilingual children from households where the two parents speak the minority language, Russian, outperform bilingual children from mixed households, who have less exposure to Russian.  Nevertheless, many studies which stress the role of the amount of input in the development of the minority language show that differences found at earlier ages are overcome at later ages in some domains (Gathercole, .  Gathercole, Thomas, Roberts, Hughes & Hughes, .  Paradis, Tremblay & Crago, .  Unsworth, ).  Consequently, they suggest that bilingual children may take longer to acquire certain structures of their weaker language, but they tend to reach native-like competence, even if at an older age, and follow the same acquisition path.  This observation shows that input differences mainly affect the rate of acquisition but not its outcome (see also Meisel, ).  This is strengthened by studies that include older children or adults (Gathercole et al. , ).  As an explanation for this protracted, yet native-like development, it has been suggested that children who have restricted input to one language may take more time to accumulate positive evidence (Gathercole, .  Gathercole & Thomas, ).  Consequently, they will need more time to accumulate this evidence if they have less exposure to the target language (see also the concept of ‘cumulative’ exposure, suggested by Unsworth, ).  However, not all linguistic domains seem to be similarly affected by reduced input.  Input effects have been shown with respect to the acquisition of grammatical structures that present opaque form–function mappings, such as the gender system and plural morphology in Welsh (Thomas & Gathercole, .  Thomas et al. , ) or the gender system in Dutch or Russian (Blom, Polišenskà & Unsworth, .  Cornips & Hulk, .  Polinsky, .  Rodina & Westergaard, .  Unsworth, ).  Also, structures that are syntactically very complex and/or are known to stabilize late in monolingual acquisition are good candidates for delayed acquisition in bilingual and, particularly, HL acquisition.  This is the case of clitic placement in EP (Flores & Barbosa, ), or structures which only occur in formal varieties of the target language, as described by Meisel, Elsig, and Bonnesen () for certain French interrogatives.  According to Tsimpli (), late acquisition is expected in general in the case of all non-core linguistic phenomena, which are related to languageexternal resources (such as working memory) or to interface phenomena.  In the case of these phenomena, Tsimpli’s prediction is that acquisition by bilingual subjects is determined only by input and not by age of onset.  What is essential for us is that timing in L development of the analyzed properties may be a further variable that has to be taken into account in studies on input effects in bilingualism.  It seems that structures which are acquired late in monolingual acquisition, due either to their complexity, interface nature, or absence in colloquial varieties, may show an even more protracted development in bilinguals’ weaker language.  Consequently, the division per se into early, late, and very late phenomena is very useful for us, if we relate the nature of the grammatical property with the amount of input together with maturational constraints, therefore not considering the factors in isolation (see Long & Rothman’s, , comments).  As for the interaction between the quantity of input and the type of property under analysis, if we assume that there are sensitive periods for the acquisition of different language domains (Meisel, ), we can suggest that insufficient exposure during the optimal phase of acquisition could indeed lead to an acquisition delay (or even failure).  In the case of late (or very late) properties, and in cases of reduced exposure at a later age, which happens with the HL child, the input the child receives during the relevant period may not be sufficient and, consequently, this delays its stabilization.  It has been suggested that in these cases bilingual children may not catch up and do not reach native-like knowledge in these domains (Thomas et al. , ).  The present study aims precisely at analyzing the effects of reduced input in the bilingual acquisition of a property, the distribution of the subjunctive mood in European Portuguese complement clauses, which stabilizes after the preschool years in monolingual acquisition.  In the next section, we summarize relevant facts concerning mood contrasts in EP complement clauses and its acquisition.  Since our subjects are HSs of EP living in Germany, we also summarize relevant facts concerning the distribution of mood in German.  MOOD IN EP AND GERMAN.  Distribution of indicative and subjunctive moods in EP Portuguese verbal morphology shows different moods, the main ones being the indicative and the subjunctive.  The selection of one or another mood in complement clauses is basically constrained by the meaning of the matrix predicate, though with some verb classes factors such as negation or the tense of the main clause may interfere with the selection of mood for complement clauses (see, e. g.  Marques, ).  In EP, the indicative is selected for complement clauses introduced by the following verb classes.  () a.  Strong epistemic verbs (which express knowledge or a high degree of belief), such as saber ‘know’ or pensar ‘think’ b.  Declarative verbs, such as dizer ‘say’ c.  Commissive verbs, such as prometer ‘promise’ d.  Fiction verbs, such as sonhar ‘dream’ On the other hand, the subjunctive is selected by verbs like the ones listed() a.  Non-epistemic implicative verbs (including verbs such as deixar ‘let’ or conseguir ‘manage’, and evaluative predicates, such as lamentar ‘regret’ or achar bem ‘approve’) b.  Non-epistemic non-implicative verbs (including verbs of volition, such as querer ‘want’ and directive verbs, such as mandar ‘order’) c.  Weak epistemic verbs (which express a negative belief or a low degree of belief, such as duvidar ‘doubt’) Concerning (), it should be said that in Karttunen () implicative verbs are those that allow the inference that the embedded proposition is true in affirmative sentences, but do not allow such inference in negative sentences.  here, the term is broadly used to refer to this kind of verbs plus factive verbs, i. e.  those whose complement proposition is taken to be true regardless of the truth value of the main proposition.  Apart from the verbs mentioned in (), there is a group of verbs that in EP accepts both moods in the complement clause.  This is the case of acreditar ‘to believe’ and a group of other verbs with the same core meaning.  Different analyses have been suggested concerning the distinctions of mood in the adult’s grammar.  Here, we accept the account of Marques (), which is based on EP data.  This author proposes that two main semantic factors intervene in the mood system of EP.  epistemicity (the attitude expressed towards the proposition is one of knowledge or belief) and veridicality (as defined in Giannakidou, ).  According to Giannakidou’s concept of veridicality, a propositional operator is veridical if the proposition it introduces is taken to be true by some entity in the relevant model, which corresponds to a set of possible worlds.  For instance, factive verbs, such as to know or to regret, are veridical operators, since their complement clauses are taken to be true by the speaker and the (entity referred to by the) subject of the main clause.  Similarly, verbs like to think and to dream are also veridical operators, since their complement clauses are taken to be true in the worlds that correspond respectively to the beliefs and to the dreams of the main clause’s subject.  The fact that a context is veridical does not mean that an epistemic propositional attitude is being openly expressed.  For instance, some factive verbs, like regret, are veridical, but they are not epistemic.  They do not primarily express an attitude of belief, but rather another kind of attitude, that we might call ‘evaluative’ (see Palmer, , amongst others).  Marques () argues that in EP all the verbs that select an indicative complement express an attitude of knowledge or POSITIVE belief (i. e.  they are veridical operators associated with epistemic modality).  This is clearly the case of the verbs in (a), and also the case of declarative (b) and commissive (c) verbs.  these verbs also express an attitude of belief, committing the subject of the main clause to the truth of the embedded proposition.  With fiction verbs (d), Marques claims that they are also epistemic predicates, with the particularity of the belief being relativized to the relevant model, e. g.  the dream world in the case of to dream (see Farkas, .  Giannakidou, , .  a. o. ).  As for the verbs that select the subjunctive, most of them (a, b) do not express a propositional attitude of epistemic nature, but rather express different kinds of attitude (they are associated with, e. g.  volition modality, deontic modality, evaluative modality).  The only kind of verbs that select the subjunctive and express an epistemic attitude are the equivalent of to doubt and verbs (e. g.  acreditar ‘believe’) which in EP allow both the indicative and the subjunctive in their complement clauses, the subjunctive being selected when a low degree of belief is expressed.  Notice, however, that the subjunctive occurs in non-veridical contexts as well as in veridical non-epistemic contexts.  in fact, some of the verbs selecting the subjunctive are non-veridical (b, c), whilst others are veridical (a).  Therefore, contrary to what happens in other languages, such as Modern Greek (see, e. g.  Giannakidou, ), one cannot say that the selection of the subjunctive in EP is driven by non-veridicality alone.  Also, one cannot say that the expression of an epistemic attitude is enough for the selection of the indicative in EP.  The subjunctive also occurs in epistemic contexts if they are non-veridical (the case of c).  Thus, according to Marques’ () proposal, the indicative is selected if an epistemic veridical attitude is expressed towards the proposition, the subjunctive being selected for all other cases (i. e.  the subjunctive is linked to the expression of both non-epistemic and epistemic non-veridical attitudes).  Therefore, the distribution of mood in EP, which was presented in () and (), can be summarized as in Table , where matrix predicates are organized according to the features [±epistemic] and [±veridical].  In this case, the category of strong epistemic verbs includes both verbs that express an attitude of knowledge or belief and other verbs, namely declarative and commissive verbs, which may also be taken to express an epistemic propositional attitude.  Fiction verbs can be said to equally express a strong epistemic propositional attitude, being also [+epistemic.  +veridical], but they are kept in the table in a separate category, since in this case the belief must be relativized to a model that is an alternative to (the main clause’s subject view of) reality (e. g.  the model corresponding to the dream, in the case of the verb to dream).  Previous results on the acquisition of mood contrasts in EP.  Accepting the analysis of mood detailed above, Jesus () investigated the acquisition of the distribution of the subjunctive by EP monolingual speakers.  In this study, an elicited production task was applied to eighty children, aged four to nine, and a control group of twenty adults.  The test consisted of a sentence completion task presenting complement clauses which were introduced by verbs pertaining to the classes mentioned above (see previous section).  A summary of the results is presented in Table .  The results confirm that the adults follow the pattern predicted by Marques’ () proposal (see previous section), selecting the subjunctive in [−epistemic] contexts, either under implicative ([+veridical]) or non-implicative ([−veridical]) predicates and in [+epistemic.  −veridical], i.  e.  under weak epistemic predicates.  Conversely, they select the indicative in [+epistemic.  +veridical] contexts – in this case, the matrix verbs used in the task were strong epistemic and fiction verbs (tested separately).  The adult accuracy rate ranged from ·% to % across all conditions, with the exception of DMC (double mood choice), in which they obtained only ·%.  This lower rate is explained by the fact that double mood choice epistemic items ([+epistemic.  ±veridical]) present cases in which mood selection is also dependent on the discourse context and may vary according to the speaker’s interpretation of the given situation.  Regarding the child data, the results suggest that, between the ages of five and nine, children may already be dealing with some semantic values that are relevant for the EP mood system.  Overall, the children showed a preference for the indicative on [+epistemic.  +veridical] contexts, both with strong epistemic and fiction verbs and, even if presenting lower rates, the subjunctive was used rather systematically in [−epistemic], i. e.  under implicative and non-implicative matrix predicates.  At the age of eight and nine, target-like performance is observed within these conditions.  % of accuracy with implicative verbs and % with non-implicative.  Nevertheless, some critical areas were found.  As for the subjunctive conditions, the data revealed a distinction between children’s performance with weak epistemic predicates ([+epistemic.  −veridical]) vs.  implicative and non-implicative predicates ([−epistemic]), the former remaining more problematic until later in acquisition (see the contrast of the scores achieved by the eight- to nine-year-olds in [–epistemic] contexts vs.  [+epistemic.  –veridical] contexts).  Hence, the indicative seems to be associated with [+epistemic] contexts and the subjunctive with [−epistemic] contexts, resulting in non-target indicative production in [+epistemic.  −veridical] contexts, i. e.  under weak epistemic predicates.  However, target-deviant answers in subjunctive conditions do not correspond only to indicative productions.  Some infinitive uses were observed, especially in the younger children.  The most expressive use of the infinitive was found within [−epistemic] conditions.  four-year-olds produced ·% of infinitives with both implicative and non-implicative predicates.  Nevertheless, at the age of five, this percentage decreases to % with implicative verbs and ·% with non-implicative verbs.  Although the infinitive responses are residual, they can be understood in the light of the SEMANTIC OPPOSITION HYPOTHESIS (Hyams, ), which suggests that, from an early age, children may use the infinitive to encode modal distinctions.  Alternatively, they may indicate some difficulties with subjunctive morphology (see Jesus, , for discussion).  As for the contexts where the indicative was the expected mood ([+epistemic.  +veridical]), children in all age groups preferred the indicative in all the expected contexts tested, i. e.  with both strong epistemic and fiction verbs, as already mentioned.  However, their performance was worse with fiction verbs, and they surprisingly employed some subjunctive forms in these contexts.  in the case of four-year-old children, the accuracy rate with strong epistemic verbs was ·%, whereas with fiction verbs it was only ·%, and, at the ages of six and seven, when children already show a target-like performance with strong epistemic verbs (producing % of indicatives), they still produce some subjunctives with fiction verbs (having ·% accurate answers).  This was interpreted by Jesus () as suggesting that at some point in development children take the REALIS/ IRREALIS opposition as interacting with the distribution of the subjunctive.  the complement of a fiction verb is interpreted as an irrealis context.  Indeed, in certain languages, such as Russian (Noonan, ), the subjunctive may to some extent be associated with the irrealis.  Based on these results, Jesus () argues that younger children show greater sensitivity to the epistemic value, first associating the subjunctive with [−epistemic] contexts and the indicative with [+epistemic] contexts.  As they develop, they become more sensitive to veridicality (when combined with epistemicity), being able to use the subjunctive with weak epistemic predicates.  In more general terms, this study has also shown that mood in complement clauses is a late-acquired phenomenon, since even eight- and nine-year-olds do not absolutely demonstrate target behaviour.  Mood in German complement clauses.  Differing from EP and other Romance languages, in German the selection of mood in complement clauses is not primarily constrained by the meaning of the matrix predicate (Meinunger, ).  Whereas in Romance languages, in many contexts, the use of the subjunctive is obligatory in certain complement clauses and cannot be replaced by the indicative, in German the indicative mood can be used with all classes of matrix predicates (see () for the use of the indicative with a volition verb, which is not possible() Ich wollte, dass sie kommt.  I wanted that she cameIND.  ‘I wanted her to come. ’ Even though German grammars formally distinguish between the present subjunctive, called KONJUNKTIV I, and the past subjunctive, called KONJUKTIV II, there is no clear temporal opposition between the present and past subjunctive.  Instead, there are different modal, discursive, and socio-stylistic distributions of both forms (Fabricius-Hansen & Sæbø, .  Zifonun, Hoffmann, & Strecker, ).  Primarily, the present subjunctive, also known as the ‘reportive subjunctive’, signals that the proposition is the object of an utterance report (Fabricius-Hansen & Sæbø, ).  According to traditional grammars, the past subjunctive may also be used to express irrealis (e. g.  Flämig, ).  However, the past and present subjunctives are often interchangeable.  Since we will not test German, we will not go into detail describing the German subjunctive.  What is relevant for the present study is that the German Konjunktiv-forms do not encode the type of semantic values encoded by the subjunctive in Portuguese, Romance languages in general, and in some other languages (such as Greek).  Therefore, if one thinks that some languages morphologically encode veridicality (e. g.  Greek) or both epistemicity and veridicality (e. g.  EP), or even a realis/irrealis opposition, the child’s task must be to determine whether the particular language s/he is acquiring encodes these particular features (which may be conceived as fixing a semantic parameter or mapping morphology with particular features).  The distribution of the morphological forms corresponding to the Konjunktiv in German is not determined by the same features.  Additionally, it may be important to highlight that the morphological subjunctive is acquired very late in L German (Knobloch, ), and it is rare in spoken, colloquial registers, where it is substituted by the periphrastic form ‘würde + infinitive’.  <Middle>In this section we present the study, defining the set of participants (bilingual HSs of EP living in Germany) and presenting the method used for testing the participants, which consisted of applying to this group of HSs the same experiment applied by Jesus () to monolingual speakers of EP.  We also state our research questions, defining particular predictions.  As stated in the ‘Introduction’, we will be generally interested in comparing monolingual and bilingual acquisition, in terms of both the scale and the rate of acquisition, with a particular interest in determining the effects of variables relating to the amount of input in the rate of acquisition.  Participants.  The participants are fifty children/adolescents from Portuguese-speaking families with an immigration background, who were all resident in Germany (in the city of Hamburg) at the time of testing.  In addition, eight adult HSs living in the same region were also tested.  All participants grew up bilingually with Portuguese as their home language and German as the majority language.  The young participants (six- to sixteen-year-olds.  mean age = ·.  SD=·) were grouped according to four age intervals.  six to seven-year-olds, eight- to nine-year-olds, ten- to twelve-year-olds, and thirteen- to sixteen-year-olds.  The two youngest age groups are age-matched with the two oldest monolingual child groups (six–seven years.  eight–nine years) tested in Jesus ().  Additionally, we decided to distinguish between ten- to twelve-year-olds and adolescents older than twelve years of age, since the age span around twelve years of age is shown to be a crucial time for language development (Bylund, .  Flores, ).  Table  presents the exact number of children per age and their categorization per age group (with mean age and standard deviation (SD)).  Information concerning children’s biography and patterns of language exposure were collected using a background questionnaire which included questions about the languages spoken at home with parents and siblings or other family members, the parents’ migration background, schooling, and sources of contact with Portuguese (e. 