Recent research on reading in English provides mounting evidence for the role of morphology in a variety of literacy skills.  Morphology refers to the aspect of language that deals with “word-formation processes, including inﬂections, derivations, and compounds” (Nagy, Carlisle, & Goodwin, 2014, p.  4).  Morphology provides meaningful cues for the reader and the speller, because it allows learners to analyze unknown words into their constituent morphemes and synthesize the morphemes into complex words.  Whereas some morphological processing operates automatically without conscious awareness (e. g. , Deacon, Parrila, & Kirby, 2008), the conscious metalinguistic sensitivity to morphological structure and the ability to manipulate morphemes have been referred to as morphological awareness (MA.  Carlisle, 1995).  The role of MA in word reading and reading comprehension has been well established in English monolinguals, above and beyond the effects of phonological awareness, vocabulary, and verbal and nonverbal intelligence (Carlisle, 1995.  Kieffer, & Lesaux, 2012.  Kirby et al. , 2012.  Nagy, Beringer, & Abbott, 2006).  MA has been linked to a variety of literacy skills, including reading accuracy, reading ﬂuency, reading comprehension (Roman, Kirby, Parrila, Wade-Woolley, & Deacon, 2009), spelling (Carlisle, 1987.  Deacon, Kirby, & Casselman-Bell, 2009.  Nunes & Bryant, 2006.  Nunes, Bryant, & Olsson, 2003), and vocabulary (Bowers & Kirby, 2010.  Carlisle & Fleming, 2003.  Nagy & Anderson, 1984).  Metaanalyses show that morphological instruction leads to signiﬁcant gains in vocabulary and reading (Bowers, Kirby, & Deacon, 2010.  Goodwin & Ahn, 2013).  Morphological problem solving has been linked to children’s ability to decipher previously untaught complex words (Anglin, 1993.  Bowers & Kirby, 2010.  Carlisle, 2007.  Carlisle & Fleming, 2003.  Wysocki & Jenkins, 1987).  All of these ﬁndings underscore the role of morphology in literacy outcomes.  In contrast, MA and reading by Arabic-speaking children is underresearched (Abu-Rabia, 2007, Abu-Rabia & Shalhoub-Awwad, 2004.  Saiegh-Haddad, 2013.  Saiegh-Haddad & Geva, 2008.  Shalhoub-Awwad & Leiken, 2016.  Taha & SaieghHaddad, 2016, 2017).  The available studies on processes of reading Arabic have included relatively small samples (sometimes not from a monolingual Arabic population), used a limited number of morphological tasks, or dealt exclusively with adults in priming experiments.  The paucity of research on MA in Arabic reading is conspicuous, particularly because morphology is a salient feature of the Arabic lexical structure.  The majority of Arabic words are at least bimorphemic because surface forms are derived by applying two abstract morphemic units (roots and word patterns.  Eviatar & Ibrahim, 2012).  Furthermore, Arabic morphology and orthography have a number of features that distinguish them from more commonly studied languages and orthographies such as English.  For example, as Boudelaa (2015) said, “The historically predominant analysis of Arabic morphology is stated in root-and pattern terms, where surface word forms are constructed by interleaving bound morphemes one within the other” (p.  2).  After describing the nature of morphological processing and morphological awareness, and reviewing evidence (in English) on the dimensionality of morphological awareness, we will return to a more detailed analysis of Arabic language, orthography, and morphology.  MORPHOLOGICAL PROCESSING AND MORPHOLOGICAL AWARENESS.  It is important to note that there is a difference between MA and morphological processing.  The classical example of the “Wug test” devised by Berko (1958) has provided evidence that children as young as 4 years old have and can use knowledge about English morphological rules.  Children’s overgeneralization of the –ed suffix to irregular past tenses such ∗goed or ∗buyed is another example of their unconscious knowledge of their morphology system (Nagy et al. , 2014.  Owens, 2001).  These are examples of tacit morphological processing.  At the more explicit level, MA requires conscious working out of the morphological processes needed, that is, awareness.  There seems to be a fine line between MA and morphological processing, and sometimes it is not easy to differentiate between implicit and explicit MA tasks.  For example, selecting which of two sentences has correct morphology could be done by judging which sounds better, without any direct or explicit application of morphological knowledge.  Other tasks, for instance, constructing a word that has particular morphological characteristics, require more explicit morphological knowledge (Deacon et al. , 2008).  Bowers et al.  (2010) and Nagy et al.  (2014) have pointed out that this is a complex issue because existing measures of MA draw on both implicit and explicit processes.  Deacon et al.  (2008) argued that morphological tasks vary with respect to modality, content, and process, and proposed a taxonomy to delineate the types of MA tasks.  For example, a morphology task may use oral or written stimuli and oral or written responses.  The content of a morphology task could include inﬂectional or derivational morphology.  Furthermore, morphology tasks may ask participants to produce a response or judge the correctness of a particular response.  Other factors contributing to this complexity include developmental issues.  for example, younger children who are still in the process of reading acquisition may perform differently than older children who read more ﬂuently and have gained more vocabulary.  Another factor could be individual differences between children depending on the type of education they receive and their abilities, including intellectual abilities.  Task demands vary also and may tap other factor such as memory or syntax.  Finally, differences across languages/orthographies and the way the type of morphology (linear vs.  nonlinear or root based vs.  stem based) would play a role in the processes needed to process words.  THE DIMENSIONALITY OF MORPHOLOGICAL AWARENESS.  While numerous studies have examined the role of MA in the development of reading in English and other alphabetic orthographies, only a few studies have investigated the dimensionality of MA in English-speaking children (Muse, 2005) or adults (Tighe & Schatschneider, 2015).  Although a wide range of MA measures has been used across studies (Apel, Diehm, & Apel, 2013), only few studies (Muse, 2005.  Spencer et al. , 2015.  Tighe & Schatschneider, 2015) have examined the number of dimensions underlying multiple MA measures.  Muse (2005) administered nine MA measures to a sample of fourth graders and found that MA emerged as a single latent construct, having considered a number of possible distinctions underlying the morphological structure.  oral–written, implicit–explicit, multiple-choice versus production, inﬂection versus derivational, different levels of word complexity, and whether contextual clues were included or excluded.  Tighe and Schatschneider (2015) gave seven measures of MA and two vocabulary measures to a group of adult students, ﬁnding that MA divided into two dimensions, one for real words and one for pseudowords, each separate from vocabulary.  Furthermore, Spencer et al.  (2015) reported on the unidimensionality of morphological awareness in two studies using a number of different morphological awareness tasks and an expanded set of vocabulary measures examining the breadth and depth of vocabulary knowledge.  They emphasized that morphological awareness is an integral part of vocabulary knowledge and may even be considered a facet of an individual’s depth of vocabulary knowledge.  Spencer et al.  (2015) supported a unidimensional model that encompassed morphological awareness and vocabulary knowledge.  The variety of MA measures used in the literature spans many differences in task requirements, as described in the above studies and in the taxonomy proposed by Deacon et al.  (2008).  Although there are linguistic differences between Arabic and English, it is important to note that the current study is partially framed in terms of the English literature on morphological awareness only because that is the greatest amount of literature available.  Hence, the multidimensionality of MA as a construct needs to be explored further, and in languages other than English.  No study has investigated the construct of MA and examined its relationship to reading among native Arabic-speaking children using multiple measures with distinct task requirements.  ARABIC LANGUAGE AND ORTHOGRAPHY.  Arabic is a Semitic language.  Its orthography has 28 letters that are primarily consonantal, is written from right to left, and uses superscripted diacritics to mark its three short vowels (Saiegh-Haddad & Henkin-Roitfarb, 2014).  When Arabic orthography employs the diacritics, it is considered to be a shallow (i. e. , transparent) orthography.  However, when Arabic words and texts appear without superscripted vowels (diacritics), it is considered to be a deep (i. e. , opaque) orthography.  Abu-Rabia (2001) demonstrated that vowelized words and text were read more accurately than nonvowelized words and text by skilled Arabic readers.  However, Shalhoub-Awwad and Leikin (2016) showed that morphological knowledge conveyed by the consistency in the word patterns compensated for the missing vowels.  In explaining how readers of Semitic languages such as Arabic and Hebrew read when short vowels are omitted, Hansen (2014) argued “The fact that short vowels are normally omitted in Semitic writing makes decoding more reliant on other kinds of information than phonology.  .  .  .  , decoding is predominantly orthographic, and the vast number of homographs makes the reader heavily dependent on context in the quest for the meaning of words” (p.  71).  A description of the Arabic language would be incomplete without a mention of diglossia.  The term diglossia describes two linguistically related varieties of a language.  the standard and the spoken (Ferguson, 1959).  Literary or Standard Arabic is used in writing and in formal communication, whereas spoken Arabic, a linguistically related form usually referred to as colloquial Arabic, is used in daily conversation.  Although each country in the Arab world has its own distinguishing dialects, they all share the same standard language, which is the only form that appears in conventional writing.  All literate Arab persons are taught this standard form in formal schooling and are expected to read and write using this written standard form regardless of their spoken dialects (Tibi & McLeod, 2014).  The difference between the standard form and the dialect has been referred as “linguistic distance” by Saiegh-Haddad (2003), and the differences exist at the phonological, morphological, syntactic, and lexical levels.  In a series of studies, Saiegh-Haddad (2003, 2004, 2005) tested the impact of the phonological distance on phonological awareness and word decoding, and showed that the difﬁculty children have with Standard Arabic phonemes appears to be related to the quality of phonological representations in long-term memory.  In a recent study, SaieghHaddad and Schiff (2016) showed that this affects reading in both vowelized and unvowelized Arabic across the school grades (Grades 2–10).  If we acknowledge that “reading is jointly deﬁned by a language and by the writing system that encodes the language” (Perfetti, 2003, p.  4), then Arabic reading acquisition in the context of diglossia deserves to be investigated further.  In spite of considerable overlap between spoken Arabic and Standard Arabic, diglossia is evident in all aspects of the language. 