I N T R O D U C T I O N.  The remediation of misarticulations in children’s speech has been a core part of speech-language pathology practice since the earliest days of the profession (Van Riper,  []), and the treatment of unintelligible speech remains a prominent function of the speech-language pathologist (Schooling, ).  However, treatment approaches are more efficient now that we understand that the underlying nature of the problem is considerably more complex than “persistence of faulty habits of articulation” (Morley, , p.  ).  Modern conceptualizations of speech sound disorders, such as the Speech Disorders Classification System (Shriberg, .  Shriberg, Austin, Lewis, McSweeny & Wilson, .  Shriberg et al. , .  Shriberg, Lewis, Tomblin, McSweeny, Karlsson & Scheer, .  Shriberg, Lohmeier, Strand & Jakielski, ) recognize multiple distal and proximal causes that explain the observed heterogeneity in clinical typology.  Specifically, speech characteristics vary greatly between children with speech sound disorders as well as within children across developmental time.  In terms of distal causes, environmental risk and protective factors interact with the genotype, to produce varying trajectories of speech development.  The heritability of speech disorders is now well established (Lewis et al. , ), and some specific genetic causes have been identified.  For example, polymorphisms in the FOXP gene are associated with apraxia of speech, a motor speech disorder characterized by poor voluntary control of speech movements.  However, these polymorphisms and apraxia of speech as a subtype of speech disorder are both rare.  More commonly, speech difficulties in children are phonological in nature and the underlying distal cause conforms to the common disease / common variant model described by Bishop ().  Accordingly, the etiology is multifactorial, involving interactions among many genetic and environmental factors that combine to explain the full range of variance in speech intelligibility.  The large number of genes involved, each having small effects, accounts for the heterogeneity observed within the general population and within diagnostic subgroups.  Therefore, advances in our understanding of the genetic underpinnings of speech sound disorders have limited direct clinical application despite hope for the future (Morgan, ).  More promising as a guide to individualizing treatment approaches is an understanding of the more proximal causes of the child’s speech problem.  These proximal causes map roughly on to the concept of the endophenotype – the network of structural mechanisms and neurolinguistic processes responsible for speech development.  As a core feature of the disorder, the processes that are associated with the child’s speech deﬁcit should be measurable even as the child matures or when there are changes in the environment.  In other words, stability in the endophenotype is expected even as the phenotype is changing with development and environmental inputs such as speech therapy.  Oral motor functioning and phonological processing will be considered here as possible proximal causes of a primary developmental speech sound disorder.  Several approaches to speech therapy are based on the view that unintelligible or misarticulated speech is caused by diﬃculties with speech motor control (Lof & Watson, ) especially when the child’s speech contains inconsistent speech errors or distortion errors (Betz & StoelGammon, .  Broomﬁeld & Dodd, .  Forrest, ).  However, motor speech disorders are actually very rare, perhaps –% of the population of children with primary developmental speech impairments (e. g.  Bradford & Dodd, .  Shriberg, ).  Some children with speech errors demonstrate signiﬁcant diﬃculties with strength, rate, or patterns of articulator movement when assessed with appropriate technologies (Gibbon, .  Goozée, Murdoch, Ozanne, Cheng, Hill & Gibbon, ).  However, these diﬃculties cannot be discerned from the characteristics of the children’s speech errors, as is sometimes assumed as in the case of socalled phonetic disorder, i. e.  distortion errors are thought to be motoric in nature but in fact are often associated with cognitive-linguistic endophenotypes and may not be associated with underlying phonetic instability (Preston & Edwards, .  Preston & Koenig, ).  Therefore, more direct measures of speech motor control, such as maximum performance tasks, are more diagnostically informative (Thoonen, Maassen, Gabreels & Schreuder, .  Murray, McCabe, Heard & Ballard, ).  Children with speech sound disorders have been observed to struggle with a range of tasks that involve encoding, storing, and manipulating  phonological representations as measured by tests of speech perception (Edwards, Fox & Rogers,), phonological memory (Munson, Edwards & Beckman, .  Sahlén, Reuterskiöld-Wagner, Nettelbladt & Radeborg, .  Shriberg et al. ,(Anthony, Greenblatt Aghara, Dunkelberger, Anthony, Williams & Zhang, .  Bird, Bishop & .  Rvachew & Grawburg, and phonological awareness (Freeman, .  Larrivee & Catts, ). Phonological processing impairments are particularly well established as an endophenotype for speech sound disorder, especially since children with a history of unintelligible speech who no longer present with surface speech errors nonetheless continue to present with long-standing phonological processing deficits (Raitano, Pennington, Tunick, Boada & Shriberg, ).  Furthermore, these deficits in phonological processing are associated with concomitant reading disability, and this conjoint risk for speech and reading disability is associated with common genetic risk factors (Smith, Pennington, Boada & Shriberg, ).  Although research at the endophenotype level leads to a sense of consensus (the majority of children with a speech sound disorder have difficulties with phonological processing), the links from the endophenotype to the phenotype level of description are not straightforward.  As previously mentioned, the clinical presentation of children with speech sound disorders is heterogeneous, and various schemas have been proposed to group the population into subtypes based on profiles of speech errors.  In particular, Dodd () has proposed that distortion errors, inconsistent errors, typical phonological process errors, and atypical error patterns differentiate subtypes that also map onto discrete proximal causes.  In particular, children with atypical patterns of phonological error were expected to have a family history of speech errors and underlying difficulties with phonological processing, but in fact these characteristics were found to be commonly occurring among samples of English-speaking children with a speech sound disorder, regardless of their patterns of speech errors.  Rather, the error type profiles identified by Dodd may reflect developmental and severity gradients rather than qualitative differences between subgroups of children (Rvachew & Brosseau-Lapré, ).  Heterogeneity in the pattern of speech errors produced by children with speech sound disorders might also reflect environmental factors rather than differences in the underlying phenotype. 