1.  INTRODUCTION.  This article seeks to put a spotlight on the roles of the body and materiality in language and gender socialization, a process that sociolinguists and linguistic anthropologists have traditionally argued takes place largely through language in interaction.  In keeping with this article’s appearance in the themed series, ‘Interaction.  Talk and Beyond,’ we present an analytic innovation.  the use of psychophysiological measures that represent the interaction between the physical and psychological aspects of brain and behavior.  The fields of sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology, and visual anthropology have a longstanding interest in the role of the body in interaction.  Discourse and conversation analysis have long been concerned with the fine-grained texture of interaction itself (Gumperz 1982.  Erickson 1985.  Tannen1984) and the delicate choreographing of physical components of the body with aspects of language such as intonation (Mendoza-Denton and Jannedy 2011).  However, we know relatively little in sociolinguistics about the psychophysiological facets of interaction.  Lab-bound research such as that with Event-Related Potentials (ERPs, small voltage events that occur in the brain in response to specific stimuli and are measured with an electroencephalograph) has long been taking place in psychology and psycholinguistics.  Sociolinguistics has only recently explored ERPs and eye tracking techniques to understand how socio-indexical information influences phoneme recognition as well as sentence and text comprehension (Beddor et al.  2013.  D’Onofrio 2015.  Pickering et al.  2004).  while other areas of linguistics are using MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) and ultrasound to understand, for example, articulation and its relation to phonological structure (Mielke, Baker and Archangeli 2010).  Sympathetic nervous system responses such as increasing heart rate, temperature, blood pressure, and electrodermal activity (EDA) are not currently exploited for what they might tell us in sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology or conversation analysis, and we believe this lacuna arises in part because of the perceived divide between field research and lab research that predominates in these disciplines, with most field sociolinguists considering psychophysiological measurement protocols to be too cumbersome and inhibitory of the naturalistic situations preferred for fieldwork and interviewing.  Here, we must recognize some exceptions in the reading and ESL ﬁelds which take advantage of the relative immobility of reading tasks to measure, for instance, the greater EDA response to ﬁrst vs.  second-language swearing and reprimands (Harris 2004).  There is no a priori reason for our discussion of the relation between language and the body to stop at the surface of the skin, especially given the current availability (indeed, ubiquity) of unobtrusive, portable devices.  As part of audience design, speakers have been shown to deploy ﬁne linguistic and gestural features to carefully ﬁt their language to speciﬁc interlocutors (Bell 1984), and they have also been shown to orient to such displays across multiple interactions (Kendon 1985).  In neighboring ﬁelds such as speech and hearing science, unconscious processes such as breathing have been shown to be tied to interactional events in laboratory situations (Hixon and Hoit 2005).  Within sociolinguistics, we are aware of the ways in which techniques of the body (Mauss 1973) participate in meaning making along with language, primarily through studies of gesture (Goodwin 2000.  Voigt et al.  2016.  inter alia), and through analyses of the body interacting with objects (Shankar and Cavanaugh 2012.  Mondada 2016).  Little attention has been paid as of yet to processes (such as those of the autonomic nervous system) which are largely outside of conscious regulation.  In contrast to sociolinguistics, the ﬁeld of videogame Human Computer Interaction (HCI) has a rich history of exploiting psychophysiological measurements to.  1.  analyze and improve user experience (Ballard and Wiest 1996.  Ravaja et al.  2008).  2.  operationalize the development of biofeedback videogames that rely on interactivity between users and their own biological output.  and 3.  evaluate and implement design choices (Kivikangas et al.  2011).  With regard to product evaluation, the insights resulting from studies of users’ physiological reactions can be employed by videogame developers seeking to quantify aspects of subjective dimensions such as fun, challenge, enjoyment, and boredom (Mandryk, Inkpen and Calvert 2006).  Video game user experience data can additionally elucidate not only individual responses, but also co-participants’ reactions to each other.  Despite difficulties in interpretation (i. 