Resolving linguistic ambiguities can reveal tendencies in the use of provided information, or biases toward one of the possible interpretations, that can be easily overlooked otherwise.  In this paper we use temporarily ambiguous sentences to examine whether gender markings may function as cues moderating the assignment of thematic roles in complex relative clause constructions.  The processing of sentence (1) may appear as difﬁcult as that of sentence (2), as they both contain object-extracted relative clauses (ORC).  Sentences (3) and (4) contain subjectextracted relative clauses (SRC), and therefore (3) may seem equally difﬁcult to comprehend as (4).  (1) The beautician, whom both designers recognized, is experienced.  (2) The artist, whom both designers recognized, is experienced.  (3) The beautician, who recognized both designers, is experienced.  (4) The artist, who recognized both designers, is experienced.  However, there is evidence that certain features shared by nouns or noun phrases (e. g. , animacy) facilitate the assignment of speciﬁc thematic roles, such as when agent roles are assigned more easily to animate and patient roles to inanimate nouns (e. g. , Bornkessel-Schlesewsky & Schlesewsky, 2009.  MacDonald, 1994.  Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Kello, 1993).  While claims about animate nouns as better agents (Gennari & MacDonald, 2008) and inanimate nouns as poorer agents (Clifton et al. , 2003.  Just & Carpenter, 1992) have already been supported by empirical evidence, the claim about gender cues as predictors of good or poor agents has not yet been demonstrated experimentally.  At the same time, similarly to animacy when described as a “supralinguistic” concept (Yamamoto, 1991) affecting linguistic phenomena (e. g. , word order), gender can be regarded as a fundamental semantic dimension expressed on biological and social levels (Ridgeway, 2001) with various linguistic representations (e. g. , grammatical1 [der Musiker/die Musikerin “the musicianmasculine/feminine” in German], natural [woman/man], deﬁnitional [mother/father], and stereotypical [nurse/surgeon] gender).  Based on psycholinguistic and sociocognitive research on gender that will be discussed in more detail below, this study attempts to clarify whether gender, along with animacy, may affect the identiﬁcation of thematic roles.  Previous research has reported gender-related observations, such as case syncretism of feminines in German (Krifka, 2009) and the strong link between agency and masculinity (Koenig, Mitchell, Eagly, & Ristikari, 2011), suggesting that entities possessing female characteristics may be less agentive and therefore more likely to serve as thematic patients.  If this is the case, then stereotypically female beautician may be perceived as a better patient compared to neutral artist (i. e. , receiving an action) in the ORC sentences, making the comprehension of (1) easier than (2).  Similarly, neutral artist may be perceived as a better agent compared to stereotypically female beautician (i. e. , producing an action) in the SRC sentences, making (4) easier than (3).  The experiments reported in the present paper use relative clause structures in German as a tool to address this issue.  THEMATIC STRUCTURE AND PROMINENCE HIERARCHIES.  A number of studies invoked thematic structure to explain biases that inﬂuence the interpretation of complex linguistic constructions, such as relative clauses (e. g. , Boland, Tanenhaus, Garnsey, & Carlson, 1995.  Pickering & Traxler, 1998.  Pickering, Traxler, & Crocker, 2000.  Traxler, Morris, & Seely, 2002).  Evaluating the role of various factors in the comprehension of relative clauses, previous research has repeatedly shown that ORCs are more difﬁcult to process than SRCs (Gordon, Hendrick, & Johnson, 2001.  Staub, 2010.  Traxler, Williams, Blozis, & Morris, 2005).  However, Mak, Vonk, and Schriefers (2002, 2006) and Traxler et al.  (2002) demonstrated that ORCs with inanimate heads, such as The movie that the director watched received the prize, were almost as easy to comprehend as SRCs of the type The director that watched the movie received a prize.  Thus, the feature of animacy has been shown to modulate the difﬁculty in the interpretation of relative clauses, showing that linguistic characteristics are a signiﬁcant factor modulating the likelihood of the assignment of an agent role to one of the two nouns in a sentence.  The expectations readers have about entities possessing certain characteristics to occupy syntactically prominent positions in a sentence can be seen within the framework of the thematic hierarchy hypothesis (e. g. , Grimshaw, 1990.  Jackendoff, 1987).  This hypothesis lists the ordering of thematic roles by prominence, with the agent role ranking the highest on the hierarchy of semantic features.  At the same time, prominence can be assessed along several dimensions other than thematic agency, such as animacy, deﬁniteness, or person, with animate entities ranking over inanimate, deﬁnite over indeﬁnite, and ﬁrst and second person over third (Lamers & de Swart, 2012).  The tripartite animacy hierarchy proposed by Croft (1990) offers a similar ordering by person (ﬁrst and second over third), NP-type (pronouns over common nouns), and animacy itself (human over nonhuman, animate over inanimate).  The deﬁnition of the agentive case, given by Fillmore as “the typically animate perceived instigator of the action identiﬁed by the verb” (1968, p.  24), indicates the relatedness of the two concepts.  agency and animacy.  In line with this deﬁnition, Yamamoto (1991) suggests that agency presupposes animacy, considering that previous research had named such conceptual properties of agency as intentionality (Davidson, 1971), dynamicity, and control (Dik, 1989).  These properties are not purely linguistic, which contributes to Yamamoto’s understanding of animacy as an “extra-” or “supralinguistic” concept, which nevertheless relates to such linguistic phenomena as case marking, word order, subject selection, andEven though the interaction of different prominence dimensions remains a subject of debate (e. g. , Klein, Guntsetseg, & von Heusinger, 2012.  Primus, 2012), the principle of harmonic alignment suggests that hierarchies within separate dimensions map onto one another, so that the hierarchy within the dimension of animacy, for instance, correlates with that of thematic roles (Lamers, 2012).  The processing is facilitated when rankings on different hierarchies point to the same argument in a sentence as being more prominent (Bornkessel-Schlesewsky & Schlesewsky, 2008).  As a result of such alignment, animacy information can be used in the assignment of thematic roles during language comprehension.  Thus, readers seem to have expectations about high-ranked animate entities to produce actions represented by the verb (i. e. , serve as agents that are high ranked on a thematic role hierarchy), while low-ranked inanimate entities are expected to rather receive those actions (i. e. , serve as patients that are low ranked on a thematic role hierarchy).  This tendency can be regarded as a bias moderating difﬁculties in the interpretation of syntactically complex sentences.  GENDER PROCESSING AND AGENCY.  The present investigation extends the current knowledge about biases in linguistic structures by examining the role of grammatical and stereotypical gender in the resolution of relative clauses.  In the literature on reference resolution, the integration of grammatical and stereotypical gender cues is widely discussed in terms of mismatch effects that are reﬂected in longer processing times when stereotypically male (e. g. , electrician) or female (e. g. , beautician) role nouns corefer with mismatching information, such as gender sufﬁxes, gender-speciﬁc pronouns, or noun phrases (e. g. , Cacciari, Corradini, Padovani, & Carreiras, 2011.  Esaulova, Reali, & von Stockhausen, 2014.  Irmen, 2007.  Kreiner, Sturt, & Garrod, 2008.  Reali, Esaulova, & von Stockhausen, in press).  Grammatical and stereotypical gender cues have been shown to affect readers’ interpretation of role nouns in highly automatized ways and to strongly inﬂuence the comprehension of sentences (e. g. , Banaji & Hardin, 1996.  Cacciari & Padovani, 2007.  Carreiras, Garnham, Oakhill, & Cain, 1996.  Esaulova et al. , 2014.  Irmen, Holt, & Weisbrod,In the literature mentioned above, the effects of both grammatical features and stereotype-based connotations of roles and contexts are analyzed.  On the one hand, this research clearly points at the fact that both gender representations affect reference resolution, and on the other hand, it relates the linguistic and the social psychological understanding of the term gender on a conceptual level.  This is in line with social cognition research (e. g. , Stahlberg, Braun, Irmen, & Sczesny, 2007), which indicates the association between conceptual and formal gender representations, where the former are expressed through gender stereotypes and the latter through grammatical features, such as gender sufﬁxes.  However, neither research on thematic structures (e. g. , Clifton et al. , 2003.  Trueswell & Tanenhaus, 1994) nor research on gender processing (e. g. , Cacciari & Padovani, 2007.  Carreiras et al. , 1996.  Esaulova et al. , 2014.  Irmen, 2007) and social cognition (Stahlberg et al. , 2007) have ever supposed the link between gender and agency or considered gender a relevant factor in the assignment of thematic roles.  At the same time, some approaches in historical linguistics indicate such a link arguing that an initial two-way distinction in gender in Germanic languages may have been based on animacy, agentivity, or the capability of subject marking (Kürschner & Nübling, 2011.  Meier-Brügger, 2002).  Bringing the research from these different areas together, we supposed that gender characteristics of nouns should be examined as constituting another dimension along which the prominence of thematic role nouns can be assessed.  This perspective draws largely on McRae, Hare, Elman, and Ferretti’s (2005) account of thematic roles, which views them as concepts formed through everyday experience rather than simply lexical information.  This account, in turn, is based on the situation model theories (Sanford & Garrod, 1981), which emphasize the role of long-term memory in the representation of a linguistically described event.  Following Yamamoto, we suggest that, similar to agency, gender presupposes animacy, most certainly in those cases when it points at the sex of the referent.  The evidence of animacy-based role assignments (Wang, Schlesewsky, Philipp, & Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, 2012) encourages the assumption that gender cues may inﬂuence readers’ implicit beliefs about good or poor agents in a similar way.  This should be reﬂected through readers’ expectations about nouns of certain gender to produce or receive actions represented by the verb in a sentence.  In social psychology, male roles are associated with higher status and power and are described as more agentive and less communal than female ones (e. g. , Koenig et al. , 2011).  Agency and communion are fundamental dimensions of social categorization (e. g. , Fiske, Cuddy, & Glick, 2007), in which the former comprises such characteristics as assertion, competence, and independence, while the latter is associated with cooperation, warmth, and empathy.  An extensive body of research in this ﬁeld indicates a possible association between agency and gender representations.  <Middle> HYPOTHESES.  In this study we examine gender represented through grammatical and conceptual characteristics, since research on language-based representation of women and men points at the commonalities in their processing.  If gender constitutes an important factor in the assessment of agency, as we would like to argue, we should be able to observe its inﬂuences on agency when it is expressed through both gender-marking sufﬁxes and through gender stereotypes, such as in typically male (/neutral)/female occupational role nouns.  The hypotheses below specify this general proposition by making speciﬁc predictions about each of these two types of gender representations.  These predictions are tested in experimental designs that manipulate the morphological marking of gender in role nouns and the stereotypical gender of role nouns independently in order to provide converging evidence about the relationship between gender processing and the identiﬁcation of thematicThe phenomenon of differential object marking described in functional/typological literature (e. g. , Aissen, 2003.  Stiebels, 2000) offers a theoretical frame for considering grammatical gender in relation to agency.  Differential object marking deﬁnes the likelihood of an object to be overtly case-marked as a function of prominence ranking.  Thus, Aissen (2003) describes preferred case marking patterns relating them to prominence hierarchies and shows that aligned AGENT > PATIENT and ANIMATE > INANIMATE hierarchies lead to unmarked animate agents and inanimate patients, whereas the violation of this alignment leads to the overt case marking of entities.  Krifka (2009) further considers the phenomenon of differential object marking in relation to the gender and case system in Germanic languages in order to explain syncretism of nominatives and accusatives observed for feminines in German.  In German, the case marking of singular masculine determiners is expressed overtly for nominative and accusative (derNominative.  denAccusative), while feminine determiners lack any morphological distinction in these cases (dieNominative/Accusative).  Similar syncretism for the neuter has been explained by the fact that the distinction between nominative and accusative is functionally important for animates, as neuter is, originally, a class of inanimates.  Since there is no reason why the masculine and the feminine should be unequal in terms of animacy, Krifka (2009) evaluates alternative explanations (e. g. , Becker, 1994.  Bittner, 2003) suggesting that this asymmetry may result from the evolution of language within the speech community where feminine NPs occur less frequently in the agent role than masculine ones.  According to the concept of harmonic alignment, the hierarchy of thematic roles corresponds to the underlying mapping of prominence hierarchies, which would indicate that masculine entities should be more prominent, since they are more likely to align with agent roles than feminine entities.  This prediction is expressed in Hypothesis 1, which concerns grammatical gender.  if grammatical gender constitutes a prominence dimension and feminine is ranked lower on the hierarchy than masculine, then readers should have expectations about grammatically feminine role nouns to rather function as patients than agents (to receive rather than produce actions) compared to masculine role nouns, which would be reﬂected in longer processing times for feminine agents than masculine ones.  Social cognition research indicates theoretical grounds to relate agency and stereotypical gender.  If the association between agency and masculinity (e. 