INTRODUCTION.  Until 1997, the healthcare needs of Brazilian transsexual people received little to no attention from the public health system (Sistema Unico de Saude – SUS).  Indeed, one of their main healthcare concerns, i. e.  sex reassignment surgeries, was regarded as a crime of mutilation by the Federal Board of Medicine (FBM).  This changed, however, with the publication of FBM Resolution 1. 482/97, in which sex reassignment surgeries were allowed to be performed as an experimental ‘treatment’ to resolve transsexual individuals’ dissatisfaction with their morphological sex.  Since then, the regulation for Brazilian transspecific healthcare policies has undergone constant revision.  The most recent governmental documents regulating gender identity clinics in the country are the Ministry of Health Decree 2. 803/2013 and the FBM Resolution 1. 955/ 2010.  the former institutionalizes the Brazilian Transsexualizing Process (‘Processo Transexualizador’) within the SUS and allows the government to subsidize surgeries and hormone therapies.  the latter revises previous resolutions and more clearly defines the FBM’s viewpoints on transsexuality and its medical management.  According to the Brazilian documents, ‘the transsexual patient has a permanent psychological disorder and [because of this] rejects his/her phenotype and tends to self-mutilate and/or commit suicide’ (Brasil 2010).  Due to their pathologized status, transsexual people who wish to have their healthcare subsidized by the State must be diagnosed as suffering from a Gender Identity Disorder (GID) – a term coined by the American Psychiatric Association (APA) in the fourth version of its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). 2 Thus, it is a psychiatric diagnosis which guides Brazilian trans-specific healthcare policies and, as a consequence, informs the interactions between transsexual people at gender identity clinics and their doctors.  Interestingly, though, the Brazilian documents never mention the DSM as a diagnostic resource. 