INTRODUCTION.  There is growing research into relatively privileged forms of migration, such as that termed lifestyle migration.  a concept that frames such movements in terms of choice and possibility rather than necessity, and which acknowledges the role played by structural and economic conditions (Benson 2016).  Such studies have utilised migrant narratives to understand how the speakers make sense of their lives within that particular sociocultural context.  While other forms of migration, such as labour movements, have undergone analysis of positioning in interaction (De Fina 2006), there has been little attention paid towards interactive positioning in lifestyle migration contexts.  By integrating two datasets of discourse – one online and one face to face – this paper presents a grounded interpretation of how a British migrant couple in France jointly construct a narrative world that is both framed and disrupted by prevailing ideologies.  To date, lifestyle migration researchers are at work in a range of global contexts and migrant nationalities, including studies of British migration to destinations such as Spain (O’Reilly 2012), Portugal (Torkington 2015) and France (Benson 2011).  Within the British contexts there is some coherence across common themes of a search for a better life abroad, conceptualising a postmodern escape to a simpler life that nevertheless perceives such migration as a purchasable, consumption-driven commodity.  Yet we should be wary of viewing such migration unproblematically as privileged.  some migrants articulate the move in terms of constraint, particularly when the region has been selected due to lower property prices (Lawson 2016).  Migrants can also be vulnerable to economic and political developments, such as the uncertainty following the 2016 Brexit vote for the U. K.  to leave the European Union (EU).  This intersection of lifestyle and economic factors has led to criticism of the term lifestyle migration as imprecise (Huete, Mantecon and Estevez 2013), since it hinders consistent deﬁnitions.  Yet with such a varied array of lifestyle migration contexts, we might question whether precision is an essential component of the overall concept.  More clarity and theoretical consistency has been afforded by the recent trend to include choice and possibilities (Croucher 2012) as key aspects within the term lifestyle migration.  This acknowledges the role of economic capital as an available resource and allows lifestyle migration to be viewed through a broad analytical lens that accounts for variation in the ways that people take up the available resources.  The paper therefore takes the perspective of lifestyle migration as an ability to move elsewhere using resources that offer a choice of possibilities for a different, often better, lifestyle.  Further critiques have focused on the idea of lifestyle migration as an unproblematic form of independently chosen self-realisation.  Researchers such as Benson (2011) argue that the everyday realities of the new life can generate ambivalence between former imaginings and lived experiences, commonly seen alongside a desire to self-identify as distinct from one’s (British) compatriots, who are often presented along stereotypical lines.  This paper shows what a focus on language in interaction can reveal, particularly concerning the ways that such processes of distinction develop linguistically as dynamic aspects of self-representation.  While the concept of stance has usefully identiﬁed indexicality in language, for example Stockburger’s (2015.  237) exploration of stances against ‘stereotypical social types’, recent developments in positioning theory are more speciﬁcally tailored towards relations between the roles negotiated in interaction and prevailing social and moral themes.  Analysing positioning as a social action at three levels of the interaction offers scope for revealing more complex and dynamic identity representations at the level of the story (tale), the interaction (telling) and the wider ideological level.  The framework has already been tested in migration contexts, as seen in De Fina’s (2013) analysis of migrant orientations to ideologies about migration.  Yet the common dyad of interviewer-interviewee can miss the rich elasticity of identity representations that might emerge within joint interviews.  For example, Damari’s (2010) interview with a binational couple revealed variance in positioning between speakers with cultural and demographic differences.  Nonetheless, it is also possible for participants to share a culture and ideological stance, but to differ in their interpretations of how to represent their actions.  In this paper, I demonstrate what a positioning analysis can reveal about such variance, in the context of a British couple who positioned themselves in contrasting ways when their lived experiences aligned them with prevailing and negative cultural stereotypes.  This paper forms part of a larger study of British migrants living in the Ariege departement of France, with an overarching research question.  how do British migrants in Ariege, France, construct and define their identities in discourse.  This paper firstly examines data from a digital British support forum to show how an ideological landscape is visible in the online interactions of members.  This is followed by analysis of extracts from an interview with a British couple – both users of the forum – to explore how interactants differ in their negotiation around these ideologies.  The results add a new perception to our understanding of the dynamic and contextually emergent nature of the reporting of agency.  Speakers who share an overall perspective on the prevailing ideologies can nevertheless be at variance in how their representations of their actual lived experience match the idealised version of the ‘right’ kind of migrant.  THE SELF AND THE ‘OTHER’ IN BRITISH MIGRATION.  A thematic thread that runs through the literature on British lifestyle migration is that of intra-group distinction and stereotyping.  A report on global British emigration by Sriskandarajah and Drew (2006.  30) referred to a tendency for expatriate Britons to ‘distinguish themselves’ from stereotypical British communities who are seen as unwilling or unable to integrate.  Benson’s ethnographic studies in France drew attention to a similar theme of distinction that revolved around a particular ‘moral position’ among British migrants in the Lot departement of France (Benson 2011.  30), where ‘other’ Britons were described as unprepared, lacking cultural (especially linguistic) capital and showing dependence on each other.  Drake and Collard’s (2007.  28) research in Normandy similarly identified an ‘appropriate model of behaviour’ whereby respondents were keen to be seen as making an effort to speak the local language and integrate.  Such observations are not confined to local contexts, and O’Reilly (2001) acknowledged the media’s role in constructing stereotypes of the British in Spain.  In a recent corpus analysis of British press articles that referenced British migration to France, Lawson (2015) identified a pattern of negative representations that included frequent associations of the British with a difficulty or reluctance to speak French, a continuing reliance on British items and English speaking services, and references to British ‘ghetto’ communities.  Benson and Osbaldiston (2014) noted how these kinds of categorisations and distinctions against the ‘other’ are widespread within studies of lifestyle migration, not just British, with migrants seemingly conscious of how their chosen lifestyle and related activities represent social or cultural value within the search for a new life. 