I N T R O D U C T I O N, English-speaking children tend to produce grammatical errors as part of normal development.  These errors can include omission of tense and agreement (tense/agreement) markers, such as Mom hug me instead of Mom hugs me.  Pronoun errors are also observed, and in English are evidenced as case errors, as in Her hug Elmo instead of She hugs Elmo.  Children may also produce errors such as Her hugs Elmo but generative grammar accounts of grammatical development have suggested that these errors should occur rarely or never (Wexler, Schütze & Rice, ).  Other accounts of language development have suggested that productions like Her hugs Elmo may actually occur more often than previously expected, and that inﬂuences of language input may help to explain why these error patterns occur (Ambridge & Pine, .  Coker, Pine & Gobet, .  Pelham, .  Pine, Joseph & Conti-Ramsden, .  Pine, Rowland, Lieven & Theakston, ).  This study was designed to examine whether pronoun case and tense/agreement features can be inﬂuenced by factors in the input.  Optional use of tense/agreement and pronoun errors.  Analysis of longitudinal language samples from young English-speaking children has revealed that most typically developing children often omit tense/agreement morphemes from obligatory contexts for some period of time after they begin combining words into phrases (e. g.  Rice, Wexler & Hershberger, .  Rispoli, Hadley & Holt, ).  Wexler and his colleagues have described this as the optional inﬁnitive (OI) period (Rice, Wexler & Cleave, .  Rice et al. , .  Wexler, ).  According to these investigators, young children have knowledge of syntax but fail to understand that verbs must be ﬁnite in main clauses.  As a result, they alternate between using tense/agreement forms appropriately and using a non-ﬁnite form in their place.  Aﬀected forms include present third person singular -s (e. g.  Mommy hugs me / Mommy hug me), copula be forms (e. g.  Mommy is nice / Mommy nice), auxiliary be forms (e. g.  Mommy is hugging me / Mommy hugging me), and past -ed (e. g.  Mommy hugged me / Mommy hug me) (Wexler, ).  Typically developing children may remain in the OI stage until four or ﬁve years of age before using tense/agreement markers in more than % of obligatory contexts (Rice & Wexler, a, b, c.  Rice et al. , ).  Wexler and his colleagues later reﬁned their explanation for how the OI phase ﬁts within the generative grammar framework by proposing the Agreement/Tense Omission Model (ATOM.  Schütze & Wexler, .  Wexler et al. , ).  According to the ATOM, when children in the OI period overtly mark agreement features on a verb (e. g.  walks) they should also use a correct nominative case pronoun (e. g.  He walks).  But if children produce a verb without overt agreement (e. g.  walk) in a context that requires it, they may produce either a nominative (e. g.  he) or non-nominative (e. g.  him) subject pronoun.  Note that agreement markers in English also mark tense.  therefore, unless both agreement and tense appear in the underlying syntax, the morpheme cannot be expressed.  If agreement is represented without tense, nominative case is licensed even though the absence of tense prevents expression of the fused tense/agreement inﬂection (resulting in He walk).  Conversely, if tense is represented without agreement, nominative case is not licensed and the default form for English (accusative or objective case) is used (e. g.  Him walk).  This distinction between agreement and tense provides an explanation for why some children are observed to produce utterances such as Him talked.  Such utterances presumably lack agreement (accounting for the use of him rather than he) but, because -ed marks tense only, its expression is not blocked by the lack of agreement.  Although the ATOM can account for a range of attested child language productions, this model provides no basis for expecting an utterance such as Him walks because the presence of the inﬂection -s implies the presence of agreement, which should license nominative case.  If such errors occur, they should be infrequent and the result of a language production performance error, according to this account.  The same expectations arise for other tense/agreement morphemes.  Thus, She walking and Her walking can be expected (along with the correct She is walking), but Her is walking is not predicted to occur.  Wexler et al.  () tested the predictions of the ATOM in children with typical development as well as those with speciﬁc language impairment.  As predicted, they found that the highest frequency of non-nominative subjects occurred with non-ﬁnite forms.  After eliminating children who showed evidence of only one pronoun case (e. g.  a child who said him but never said he or vice versa), they evaluated the resulting group of children (with ‘case contrast’) and again found the highest frequency of non-nominative subjects in non-ﬁnite clauses and the least frequent with agreeing verbs.  The authors concluded that the predictions of the ATOM model held true even though there were some instances when children produced non-nominative subjects (e. g.  Him hugs).  Wexler and with verbs marked for tense/agreement colleagues attributed all instances of these unexpected errors to performance errors by the child, small sample size, and potential sampling error.  However, several subsequent studies of spontaneous and elicited speech production by typically developing children and children with speciﬁc language impairment have reported use of non-nominative subjects with verbs marked for tense/agreement at rates higher than would be expected based on the ATOM’s predictions (Ambridge & Pine, .  Charest & Leonard, .  Loeb & Leonard, .  Pine et al. , .  Pine et al. , .  Wisman Weil & Leonard, ).  These studies reveal that the general patterns of agreement and case assignment predicted by the ATOM hold, but errors of the type Him hugs occur too often to be dismissed as noise in the data.  The role of input.  Input-based accounts of language acquisition may be helpful in explaining why errors such as Him hugs occur more often than previously assumed by generativist accounts.  In an attempt to explain young English-speaking children’s me-for-I errors, Kirjavainen, Theakston, and Lieven () examined the relationship between children’s productions of me in subject position and their caregivers’ use of me in secondary clauses (e. g.  Let me do it), using longitudinal data from children ages two to four years in the Manchester corpus.  Proportional productions of me in preverbal contexts between children and their caregivers were signiﬁcantly correlated and there was a match between the speciﬁc verbs used in these contexts by children and their caregivers.  In other words, if a child said Me do it, it was likely that the mother had said phrases such as Let me do it, Help me do it, or Watch me do it more often than other verbs in the input that were not used in me + Verb complement clauses.  Thus English-speaking children are thought to extract their me-for-I productions from these me + Verb complement clauses heard in the input (Lieven, ).  The frequency of case-distinct (e. g.  we–us) versus case-ambiguous (e. g.  you– you) pronouns in the input to children by their caregivers may also point to an explanation for why English-acquiring children produce pronoun case errors.  According to the input ambiguity hypothesis of Pelham (), a relationship exists between the rate of case ambiguity produced by adult speakers of a language and the case errors produced by children acquiring that language.  Pelham compared corpora of English and German because Englishacquiring children produce pronoun case errors, whereas German-acquiring children rarely produce pronoun case errors but do produce article case errors.  In support of the input ambiguity hypothesis, Pelham reported that English-speaking caregivers produced ambiguous pronouns (it, you, her) ·% of the time.  In contrast, German adults produced ambiguous pronouns only ·% of the time, when speaking with their young children.  Given the high frequency of case-ambiguous pronouns produced by English-speaking caregivers in their speech to young children, it may be possible that children temporarily form abstract rules about the properties of pronouns from highly frequent examples of you and it in both nominative and object case positions.  Experimental and longitudinal studies are needed to examine whether there might be a correspondence between the syntactic frames used by English-speaking caregivers with you and it forms and the frames children use when producing non-nominative for nominative pronoun case errors.  It may be that speciﬁc pre- or post-verbal contexts in which case-ambiguous pronouns are used by English-speaking caregivers as in () and () contribute to children’s overextensions of non-nominative pronouns to subject positions as in () and ().  The present study examines the input-based factors that may contribute to why children make pronoun errors, with special reference to the input ambiguity hypothesis.  We pursue this issue through a modiﬁed structural priming task.  Structural priming refers to the inﬂuence that the grammatical form of one sentence (e. g.  The girl bought the present for her mother) can have on the form of a subsequent sentence (e. g.  an utterance produced as The boy gave the money to his sister rather than The boy gave his sister the money).  This inﬂuence can occur at a rather abstract structural level, as it is seen even when the subsequent utterance shares no lexical content or thematic relations with the prior utterance (Bock & Loebell, ).  In the classic structural priming paradigm (Bock, ), participants hear and repeat sentences (the prime) and then describe target pictures that are semantically unrelated to the prime, but amenable to the same sentence structure.  Variations of this method have included speakers listening but not repeating the prime, and describing the target picture after several ﬁller pictures have appeared between the prime and the target picture (see reviews in Leonard, .  Pickering & Ferreira, ).  Although the early structural priming studies used adults as participants, a growing number of studies have examined priming in children (e. g.  Bencini & Valian, .  Foltz, Thiele, Kahsnitz & Stenneken, .  Garraﬀa, Coco & Branigan, .  Huttenlocher, Vasilyeva & Shimpi, .  Miller & Deevy, .  Rowland, Chang, Ambridge, Pine & Lieven, .  Savage, Lieven, Theakston & Tomasello, .  Shimpi, Gámez, Huttenlocher & Vasilyeva, .  Thothathiri & Snedeker, ).  Most studies of children have primed syntactic structure (e. g.  inﬂuencing children’s use of passive sentences through the experimenter’s use of passives).  However, Leonard and colleagues have found priming eﬀects on the use of grammatical morphemes such as auxiliary is and past tense -ed by children at a stage of development when these morphemes were only inconsistently used in obligatory contexts (Leonard, Miller, Deevy, Rauf, Gerber & Charest, .  Leonard, Miller, Grela, Holland, Gerber & Petucci, ).  In adults, target sentences that include some of the same lexical items as the prime sentence show even stronger priming eﬀects than prime–target pairs that share only syntactic structure.  However, this ‘lexical boost’ is short-lived.  when several ﬁller sentences appear between the prime and the target, the priming eﬀects are the same as for prime–target pairs that have no lexical overlap.  Importantly, in young children, the lexical boost is not seen.  One possible reason is that the boost is the result of explicit memory of details of the prime sentence, and young children’s memory skills may not be suﬃcient to retain such information (Rowland et al. , ).  One prominent view of structural priming is that it represents a type of implicit learning that affects, incrementally, a speaker’s command of syntactic structure (Bock & Griffin, ).  Learning is assumed when speakers continue to show the influence of a prime even with intervening material and time before the production of the target.  In addition, computational models based on structural priming show clear structural learning that is independent of specific lexical content (Chang, Dell & Bock, ).  The implicit nature of such learning is illustrated by the finding that adults with anterograde amnesia showed structural priming even with multiple intervening fillers even though these individuals had only limited recognition memory of the prime sentences that had been presented just minutes before (Ferreira, Bock, Wilson & Cohen, ).  From the implicit learning perspective, there are more than parallels between changes due to priming and changes that occur in children’s syntactic development.  As noted by Rowland et al.  (, p.  ), structural priming may be “a consequence of the implicit statistical learning mechanism that is responsible for learning syntactic representations in the first place”.  To evaluate the input ambiguity hypothesis, we created a modification of the structural priming paradigm, referred to here as ‘paired priming’.  In this modification, children hear and repeat not a single prime sentence before responding, but a pair of prime sentences in which the referent that serves as the direct object in the first sentence of the pair serves as the subject of the sentence in the second sentence of the pair.  In this way, we could provide grammatical sentence pairs in which the pronoun takes the same form in object and subject position, as in Mom feeds you .  .  .  and you feed Pluto, as well as sentence pairs whose object and subject forms differ, as in Mom hugs me .  .  .  and I hug Tinker Bell.  Once the second sentence of the pair is repeated by the child, the examiner then provides the first sentence of a second pair, asking the child to provide the next sentence of this pair, as in Mom feeds her and [child describes a picture of the same girl who, in turn, is feeding another character] or Mom hugs him and [child describes a picture of the same boy who, in turn, is hugging another character].  We hypothesized that after hearing sentence pairs involving non-contrasting pronouns such as you–you, the children would be more likely to complete the second pair with a subject pronoun that matches the object form used in the preceding sentence, as in Her feed/feeds Mickey Mouse.  The children’s responses were also expected to contain a relatively large number of third person singular -s productions even when produced with a non-nominative subject pronoun (as in Her feeds) because this inﬂection will have appeared in the examiner’s production and should also serve as a<Middle> M E T H O D.  Participants.  Thirty monolingual English-speaking children ( female,  male) with typical language development participated.  The children ranged in age from .  to .  (M= . , SD = · months).  All were enrolled in a preschool or daycare and parents reported no concerns about speech and language development.  Each child also demonstrated normal language abilities based on a standard score above – standard deviation of the mean (M= ·, SD = ·) on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, th Edition (PPVT-.  Dunn & Dunn, ).  All children also passed a pure tone audiometric screening at  dB HL for , , , and  Hz bilaterally.  Six additional children were initially enrolled in the study but did not qualify.  These children ( female,  male) were aged .  to .  (M= . , SD = · months).  All six of the children were excluded because they were unwilling or unable to participate in the research activities during the first one or two research sessions.  Procedures.  Participants completed assessment and research tasks in three or four – -minute sessions in the authors’ child language lab (n = ), in a quiet room at the child’s school (n = ), in the child’s home (n = ), or at the child’s school and home (n = ).  A summary of the schedule of tasks appears in Table .  All sessions were digitally audio-recorded using a Marantz professional solid-state recorder, model PMD, with an external microphone (Crown® PZM® - Pressure Zone Microphone®).  A parent of each participant consented to the research activities in accordance with standards of the authors’ Institutional Review Board.  Research sessions were typically conducted once a week, for three consecutive weeks.  One session involved language testing and the second and third sessions involved the two paired priming conditions along with completion of the language testing.  A fourth session was used to complete language testing, when needed (n = ).  For all participants, there was at least one week between participation in each of two paired priming conditions.  The children’s pre-experiment pronoun and third person singular -s use.  Prior to administering the paired priming task, it was critical to determine whether children were, in fact, using pronouns of different forms as well as the third person singular -s inflection.  Our hypotheses were grounded on the assumption that both nominative and non-nominative pronouns were present in the children’s inventories, and that they had begun to use third person singular -s in at least limited contexts.  It was important, therefore, to document this type of use.  Although spontaneous speech samples would be the most natural means of obtaining this information, these samples may not necessarily include the obligatory contexts for the forms of interest.  For this reason, we chose to use more structured tasks that included obligatory contexts for different pronoun forms and third person singular -s.  Spontaneous speech samples were also obtained.  however, these served primarily to provide supplementary information about the children’s use of the forms of interest.  In Table , we present the children’s pre-experiment use of pronouns and third person singular -s.  As described below, from the larger group of thirty children, twenty-one children provided evidence of using all relevant pronouns (he, she, him, her) and a sufficient number of scorable responses in the paired priming task to permit data analysis.  Table  provides the pre-experiment use for all thirty children, and for the twenty-one children providing the final data analysis set.  Pre-experiment pronoun use.  For the structured pronoun task, nominative, objective, and genitive case third person pronouns (he/him/his, she/her/her, they/them/their) were elicited from the children.  An interactive iPad application was created using Keynote version · for Mac (Apple Inc. , –) and Keynote version ·· for iPad (Apple Inc. , –).  Participants viewed the presentation via Keynote for iPad on the iPad  (Model MCLL) running iOS ·· (Apple Inc. , –).  Participants sat next to the examiner, and a dog puppet acted as a confederate to encourage the child to talk about the stimuli.  The stimuli were set up to elicit sentences about WHO PLAYS WITH WHAT.  Pictures included real photographs of a boy and a girl playing with a variety of toys.  The toys were selected to be relatable and familiar to the children who participated in this study.  The child heard a series of six questions of the type Who is playing with X. , aimed at eliciting nominative case pronouns.  The child ﬁrst chose one of three pictures (target picture or two foils).  Upon touching the correct picture the child heard “nice work” (or similar reinforcement), followed by the request, Okay, now tell Doggie, who is playing with X.  The target response expected was He/She/They is/are playing with X.  If the child did not respond, or responded with a single word (e. g.  Him), the child was shown a prompt screen, heard the prompt question again (Who is playing with X. ) and the examiner used the foil pictures to model an appropriate response (e. g.  Look, she is playing with a hat, they are playing with the house, and .  .  . ).  The examiner encouraged the child to imitate her description of the foil pictures to encourage use of a complete phrase in response to the target picture.  If the child still did not respond, the next item was administered.  The six objective case and six genitive case items were administered in a similar fashion.  The prompt question for elicitation of objective pronouns was.  Who does the X belong to. , with the target response being.  The X belongs to him/her/them.  For genitive items, the prompt question was.  Whose X is this. , and the target response was.  This is his/her/their X.  For genitive responses, the child was required to produce the entire noun phrase to ensure use of a possessive determiner (his, her, their) rather than a possessive independent function pronoun (his/hers/theirs).  Thus, children who produced one-word responses (e. g.  his) following the genitive elicitation question were shown the prompt screen, heard the elicitation question again (e. g.  Whose hat is this. ) and the examiner used the foil pictures to model an appropriate response (e. g.  Look, this is his turtle, this is their bus, and this is .  .  . ).  If the child still did not provide an on-target response, then the next item was administered.  The three different pronoun case types were consistently presented in the same order for all participants.  nominative, objective, and genitive.  When needed, the child was given breaks between blocks or completed other portions of the assessment battery between each section of the pronoun production screener.  The elicited pronoun production measure was scored on-line by the examiner, scoring was checked and necessary changes were made after listening to the audio-recording.  An elicited pronoun error rate was calculated based on data from the elicitation task. 