Children with speciﬁc language impairment (SLI) are characterized by a marked deﬁcit in language development despite apparently typical intellectual, sensory, and social abilities and neurological state.  This deﬁcit may affect both expressive and receptive language in both lexical and grammatical domains.  One of the central areas of difﬁculty in children with SLI is sentence comprehension, particularly evident in complex sentences (e. g. , Bishop, Bright, James, Bishop, & van der Lely, 2000.  Norbury, Bishop, & Briscoe, 2002.  van der Lely, 1996, 1998.  van der Lely & Harris, 1990.  van der Lely & Stollwerck, 1997).  Some argue that problems in sentence comprehension (alongside other language difﬁculties) are caused by a deﬁcit in the innate representation of grammar (Rice, Wexler, & Redmond, 1999.  van de Lely, 2005), while others claim that factors external to grammar such as weaknesses in working memory (Ellis Weismer & Thordardottir, 2002.  Joannisse & Seidenberg, 1998.  Montgomery, 1995, 2000, 2004.  Montgomery & Evans, 2009.  Montgomery, Magimairaj, & Finney, 2010.  Norbury et al. , 2002), auditive perception (Tallal & Piercy, 1973), or the general slowing of processing (Kail, 1994.  Leonard et al. , 2007.  Miller, Kail, Leonard, & Tomblin, 2001.  Windsor & Hwang, 1999) can account for the observed problems.  Sentences containing an anaphoric expression like a reﬂexive or a pronoun are among complex sentence types that might be problematic for children with SLI, and they are also good candidates for investigating different sources of language difﬁculties.  The correct interpretation of anaphoric expressions depends upon another expression in context.  It requires knowledge of clausal structure and syntactic dependencies, but it also builds on processing distant constituents, burdening working memory.  In many cases, it requires selection among several candidates, relying on cognitive control.  Thus, this domain of grammatical processing is a good focus of study for examining the contribution of linguistic and extralinguistic cognitive factors to language processing.  Although these factors make sentences with anaphoric expressions a good testing ground for disentangling different accounts of language impairment, as far as we are aware, there are only three studies that investigate anaphor interpretation in children with SLI (Montgomery & Evans, 2009.  Novogrodsky & Friedman, 2010.  van der Lely & Stollwerck, 1997).  Van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997) investigated the interpretation of pronouns and reﬂexives to ﬁnd out whether intrasentential reference assignment is impaired in children with SLI, and what the underlying causes of the impairment are.  Using a sentence–picture veriﬁcation task to test 12 English-speaking children with SLI aged between 9 years, 3 months (9. 3) and 12. 10 years and three language control groups, they observed signiﬁcantly lower levels of performance in children with SLI than in any of the TD groups.  They concluded that children with SLI show a modular language deﬁcit concerning dependent structural relationships between syntactic constituents.  Montgomery and Evans (2009)’s main aim was the investigation of the relationship between working memory and sentence comprehension.  In their sentence comprehension task, they used a shorter version of van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997)’s design involving pronouns and reﬂexives, and they also tested comprehension of passive sentences in a sentence–picture veriﬁcation task.  They tested 24 English-speaking children with SLI aged between 6 and 12 years and two TD groups.  They did not report results for sentences with anaphors separately, but the total scores were signiﬁcantly lower in children with SLI than in age-matched TD children and similar to scores in the control group of language and memory matched TD children (see more details about the study below in the Sentence Comprehension and Working Memory in Children With SLI section).  In Novogrodsky and Friedman (2010)’s study, interpretation of pronouns and reﬂexives was tested together with comprehension of complex sentences involving wh-movement in a picture selection task in 12 Hebrew-speaking children with SLI aged between 9. 3 and 13. 10 and control children.  Their objective was to ﬁnd out whether different kinds of dependencies can be selectively impaired or the deﬁcit involves all of them.  While children in the SLI group showed impairments in the interpretation of sentences involving wh-movement relative to TD children, no group differences were observed in anaphor interpretation, suggesting the possibility of selective impairments.  The apparent controversy in the above ﬁndings may result from methodological differences.  Impairments in anaphor interpretation were observed in the two studies relying on sentence–picture veriﬁcation (Montgomery & Evans, 2009.  van der Lely & Stollwerck, 1997).  this measure could be more sensitive to complex sentence comprehension differences than choosing the picture that matches the sentence out of two candidates.  The two studies that found signiﬁcant differences between the SLI and TD groups took different theoretical approaches and thus drew different conclusions concerning the source of difﬁculties in anaphor interpretation in SLI.  Van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997) argue that difﬁculties with anaphor interpretation are a consequence of a grammar-speciﬁc deﬁcit (in the binding module of grammar.  see below).  In contrast, Montgomery and Evans (2009) propose that anaphor comprehension deﬁciencies are secondary to reduced complex working memory capacity in children with SLI.  Our goal in the present study was to explore whether anaphor comprehension is problematic in Hungarian children with SLI, and to identify possible sources of the potential deﬁcit in antecedent assignment.  In what follows, we will review the generative linguistic account of anaphor interpretation, psycholinguistic models of anaphor comprehension based on online sentence comprehension studies, and various accounts of difﬁculties with anaphor processing.  We will also discuss previous work on the associations between working memory and sentence comprehension in SLI.  We then clarify the concept of cognitive control, and go on to discuss the potential role of cognitive control in anaphor interpretation in children with SLI.  SYNTACTIC FACTORS IN ANAPHOR INTERPRETATION.  Within generative grammar, the interpretation of anaphors is accounted for by binding theory (Chomsky, 1981, 1986).  In binding theory, there are two main syntactic principles (Principles A and B) that constrain potential antecedents for reﬂexives and pronouns.  Binding Principle A states that a reﬂexive must be bound in its governing category, which means that the reﬂexive has to have a c-commanding antecedent within the same governing category.  In contrast, pronouns cannot be bound within the same clause according to Binding Principle B but should corefer with a suitable discourse element in the context.  Thus, the antecedent of the reﬂexive herself must be Mary in (1a), whereas the antecedent of the pronoun her cannot be Mary in (1b).  From the perspective of processing, these principles express the syntactic locality conditions of binding that presuppose the recognition of the different types of anaphors.  Chien and Wexler (1990) and Grodzinsky and Reinhart (1993) argue that sentences with a pronoun have two logical interpretations.  when the pronoun (e. g. , her in (1b)) is coindexed with the subject of the clause (Mary in (1b)) and when it is not.  They propose that the correct interpretation has to be computed with the help of a pragmatic principle (see more details in the next section) that makes pronouns more difﬁcult to interpret than reﬂexives.  However, according to Chien and Wexler (1990) if the antecedent is a quantiﬁer, only one interpretation is possible, because coindexation with a quantiﬁer is only possible with a variable bound by (i. e. , being in the same clause with) that quantiﬁer.  For this reason, in these cases the processing of the pronoun will not be more difﬁcult than the processing of reﬂexives.  PROCESSING ANAPHORS IN SENTENCES.  An increasing number of studies investigate when and how the abovementioned syntactic constraints take effect during anaphor processing, relying on online sentence comprehension methods (priming, self-paced reading, eye-tracking during reading, and eye-tracking during listening), mainly in adults.  Some of the ﬁndings suggest that the adult parser only considers syntactically appropriate antecedents (those which are in accordance with Principle A and B) but not structurally inappropriate ones (e. 