INTRODUCTION.  There is growing research into relatively privileged forms of migration, such as that termed lifestyle migration.  a concept that frames such movements in terms of choice and possibility rather than necessity, and which acknowledges the role played by structural and economic conditions (Benson 2016).  Such studies have utilised migrant narratives to understand how the speakers make sense of their lives within that particular sociocultural context.  While other forms of migration, such as labour movements, have undergone analysis of positioning in interaction (De Fina 2006), there has been little attention paid towards interactive positioning in lifestyle migration contexts.  By integrating two datasets of discourse – one online and one face to face – this paper presents a grounded interpretation of how a British migrant couple in France jointly construct a narrative world that is both framed and disrupted by prevailing ideologies.  To date, lifestyle migration researchers are at work in a range of global contexts and migrant nationalities, including studies of British migration to destinations such as Spain (O’Reilly 2012), Portugal (Torkington 2015) and France (Benson 2011).  Within the British contexts there is some coherence across common themes of a search for a better life abroad, conceptualising a postmodern escape to a simpler life that nevertheless perceives such migration as a purchasable, consumption-driven commodity.  Yet we should be wary of viewing such migration unproblematically as privileged.  some migrants articulate the move in terms of constraint, particularly when the region has been selected due to lower property prices (Lawson 2016).  Migrants can also be vulnerable to economic and political developments, such as the uncertainty following the 2016 Brexit vote for the U. K.  to leave the European Union (EU).  This intersection of lifestyle and economic factors has led to criticism of the term lifestyle migration as imprecise (Huete, Mantecon and Estevez 2013), since it hinders consistent deﬁnitions.  Yet with such a varied array of lifestyle migration contexts, we might question whether precision is an essential component of the overall concept.  More clarity and theoretical consistency has been afforded by the recent trend to include choice and possibilities (Croucher 2012) as key aspects within the term lifestyle migration.  This acknowledges the role of economic capital as an available resource and allows lifestyle migration to be viewed through a broad analytical lens that accounts for variation in the ways that people take up the available resources.  The paper therefore takes the perspective of lifestyle migration as an ability to move elsewhere using resources that offer a choice of possibilities for a different, often better, lifestyle.  Further critiques have focused on the idea of lifestyle migration as an unproblematic form of independently chosen self-realisation.  Researchers such as Benson (2011) argue that the everyday realities of the new life can generate ambivalence between former imaginings and lived experiences, commonly seen alongside a desire to self-identify as distinct from one’s (British) compatriots, who are often presented along stereotypical lines.  This paper shows what a focus on language in interaction can reveal, particularly concerning the ways that such processes of distinction develop linguistically as dynamic aspects of self-representation.  While the concept of stance has usefully identiﬁed indexicality in language, for example Stockburger’s (2015.  237) exploration of stances against ‘stereotypical social types’, recent developments in positioning theory are more speciﬁcally tailored towards relations between the roles negotiated in interaction and prevailing social and moral themes.  Analysing positioning as a social action at three levels of the interaction offers scope for revealing more complex and dynamic identity representations at the level of the story (tale), the interaction (telling) and the wider ideological level.  The framework has already been tested in migration contexts, as seen in De Fina’s (2013) analysis of migrant orientations to ideologies about migration.  Yet the common dyad of interviewer-interviewee can miss the rich elasticity of identity representations that might emerge within joint interviews.  For example, Damari’s (2010) interview with a binational couple revealed variance in positioning between speakers with cultural and demographic differences.  Nonetheless, it is also possible for participants to share a culture and ideological stance, but to differ in their interpretations of how to represent their actions.  In this paper, I demonstrate what a positioning analysis can reveal about such variance, in the context of a British couple who positioned themselves in contrasting ways when their lived experiences aligned them with prevailing and negative cultural stereotypes.  This paper forms part of a larger study of British migrants living in the Ariege departement of France, with an overarching research question.  how do British migrants in Ariege, France, construct and define their identities in discourse.  This paper firstly examines data from a digital British support forum to show how an ideological landscape is visible in the online interactions of members.  This is followed by analysis of extracts from an interview with a British couple – both users of the forum – to explore how interactants differ in their negotiation around these ideologies.  The results add a new perception to our understanding of the dynamic and contextually emergent nature of the reporting of agency.  Speakers who share an overall perspective on the prevailing ideologies can nevertheless be at variance in how their representations of their actual lived experience match the idealised version of the ‘right’ kind of migrant.  THE SELF AND THE ‘OTHER’ IN BRITISH MIGRATION.  A thematic thread that runs through the literature on British lifestyle migration is that of intra-group distinction and stereotyping.  A report on global British emigration by Sriskandarajah and Drew (2006.  30) referred to a tendency for expatriate Britons to ‘distinguish themselves’ from stereotypical British communities who are seen as unwilling or unable to integrate.  Benson’s ethnographic studies in France drew attention to a similar theme of distinction that revolved around a particular ‘moral position’ among British migrants in the Lot departement of France (Benson 2011.  30), where ‘other’ Britons were described as unprepared, lacking cultural (especially linguistic) capital and showing dependence on each other.  Drake and Collard’s (2007.  28) research in Normandy similarly identified an ‘appropriate model of behaviour’ whereby respondents were keen to be seen as making an effort to speak the local language and integrate.  Such observations are not confined to local contexts, and O’Reilly (2001) acknowledged the media’s role in constructing stereotypes of the British in Spain.  In a recent corpus analysis of British press articles that referenced British migration to France, Lawson (2015) identified a pattern of negative representations that included frequent associations of the British with a difficulty or reluctance to speak French, a continuing reliance on British items and English speaking services, and references to British ‘ghetto’ communities.  Benson and Osbaldiston (2014) noted how these kinds of categorisations and distinctions against the ‘other’ are widespread within studies of lifestyle migration, not just British, with migrants seemingly conscious of how their chosen lifestyle and related activities represent social or cultural value within the search for a new life.  As symbolic value is applied to social actions, often in terms of being integrated (Lawson 2016), so an opportunity emerges for ideologies – opinions, explanations, norms or values of a ‘group-based, shared framework’ (van Dijk 1990.  177) – to develop into a recognised value system relating to (in)appropriate forms of migrant behaviour.  As speakers orient towards a particular evaluative stance, they contribute towards the construction and maintenance of the value system.  It has been acknowledged that lifestyle migration owes as much to structural opportunities as to agency (O’Reilly 2012), yet choice and agency are nevertheless intrinsic to lifestyle migration.  People make decisions of where and how to live, explaining and justifying their actions and choices when pursuing a new life.  There is therefore potential for reflexivity in how they interpret these actions and tell a particular version of themselves in narrative discourse.  For the British living in the rural Lot departement of France, Benson (2011.  40) concluded that migration was perceived as a ‘risky act’ through which the British were able to augment their sense of individual agency and achievement, self-presenting as ‘pioneers’ with ‘get up and go’.  Benson argued that the frequent assertion of their agency worked to keep any uncertainty and ambivalence, such as their continuing outsider status, at bay.  The notion of an ideal migrant against the stereotypical ‘other’ therefore presents a resource for positive self-identiﬁcation, and one that is of particular interest when the discursive representation of choice and agency is problematic.  For example, limited language skills and less than full knowledge of the new way of life can present barriers to living the ‘appropriate’ model of behaviour, resulting in a struggle to reconcile the ideal and imagined life with how it is actually experienced.  As Torkington (2015.  227) noted in the Algarve, this can lead to identity dilemmas within discourse, such as where an admission of not speaking Portuguese conﬂicted with a stated moral obligation for the British to learn it.  Using a focus on linguistic representations, Torkington identiﬁed a range of both internal (‘I’m too busy’) and external agency repertoires (‘everyone here speaks English’) used to negotiate around these dilemmas.  The concept of agency – a way to identify the ‘capacity by which individuals perceive themselves to be able to act in meaningful ways’ (Miller 2014.  142) – is therefore particularly useful for theorising and analysing the complexities within self-identiﬁcation in lifestyle migration, where it is negotiated in the face of prevailing ideologies about appropriate behaviour.  Going beyond a focus on what respondents say they do, analysis of speaker positioning can explore more dynamic interactional aspects as migrants represent the control they have over their choices and actions.  While members of the online forum make binary representations of the ideal migrant self and the ‘other’, the discourse analysis of interviews demonstrates how negotiation around the prevailing ideologies results in more ﬂuidity.  The aim of this paper, then, is to take a relatively novel approach by pairing local data with that from the wider context, in order to analyse how migrants negotiate inconsistencies where their actions do not align with those of a socially imposed value system.  <Middle> THE CURRENT STUDY.  CONTEXT, DATA AND METHOD.  The research context of the Ariege.  The Ariege is one of 13 departements (administrative divisions) in the recently created Occitanie region of south-west France (it previously lay within the MidiPyrenees region).  It is relatively rural and one of the least populated departments in France.  Despite a continuing loss of local inhabitants to seek employment elsewhere, it is also one of the fastest growing departements, with sufficient incoming migration in recent years to result in an annual net increase of around +1400 (Insee 2009).  It is difficult to obtain precise numbers of Britons residing in France as there has been no requirement for EU citizens to register, whether one resides permanently in France or buys a holiday home there.  However, figures suggest that during the period 2001–2006, more than a third of the 16,600 foreigners to settle in rural areas of the Midi-Pyrenees were British (Touret, Bourniquel and Poisson 2010).  Nevertheless, the estimated number of Britons in the Ariege specifically is relatively low at 30 percent of foreigners, compared with ‘more than 45%’ for the Lot, for example (Touret, Bourniquel and Poisson 2010.  29).  An integrated approach to data analysis.  There has been criticism (Benwell and Stokoe 2006, cited in De Fina 2013.  44) of studies that attempt to link macro and micro contexts without providing an empirical basis for such links.  While the interview data of Benson and others have provided an ethnographic entry point into the lives of British migrants in France and patterns of repertoires, there is potential for circularity of arguments if they emerge from analysis of interviews alone.  As Antaki et al.  (2003) argue, we should be wary of using interview data to not only identify and justify the existence of an ideology, but at the same time explain the discourse in terms of such ideologies.  Deppermann (2013) raised this as a key methodological question within narrative work that aims to relate local positioning acts to more macro structures, reviewing ethnographic approaches as well as those that seek recurrent, broad patterns, or iterativity, across larger samples of data (Georgakopoulou 2013).  De Fina (2013.  54), for example, presented ‘important similarities’ across a repertoire that included local migrant narratives and broadcasts on American radio.  Nevertheless, a detailed integration of data to investigate the relationship between macro and micro positioning, using different data contexts but within the same community, is relatively novel within narrative analysis.  The current study shows how a mixed methods approach can provide a robust foundation to any interpretations of how ideologies are actually constructed and maintained within and beyond a local interview context.  The study developed via two research sub-questions that show how the first – an exploration of how lifestyle migration is mediated and identity represented within an online forum – can give valuable insights to a second question that asks what does local migrant discourse reveal about the expression of identity and agency within a lifestyle migration context.  The digital forum offered naturally occurring data from a discernible and mutually-engaged community, some of whom were approached for interview.  In this way, the data from the online forum for British migrants provided an empirical basis with which to examine local orientations to wider ideologies.  This forum belonged to a website that catered for English-speaking residents in the Ariege, offering information on many topics.  The forum had a number of categories where members could post and ask for advice, offer information or announce that they were moving to the area.  Members needed to be registered in order to post, but the posts themselves could be read by anyone.  The website had an English owner who maintained an active presence as forum moderator.  The site became subject to frequent hacking attacks and it closed in 2011.  After introducing the project on the forum in 2011, I invited members to fill out a questionnaire, which led to twelve interviews.  At the same time, after obtaining permission from the site owners I began a qualitative selection of data.  Threads were selected from a variety of interactions across a range of post types in order to gain a range of perspectives, including the forum’s support mechanisms as well as the type of conflict that sometimes developed.  As the research questions related to identity representation, some threads were selected as they showed positioning strategies that indexed social categorisations of Britons in France.  The total dataset consists of nine topic threads that were posted between 2004 and 2008.  Threads vary from the shortest, consisting of four posts (726 words) by four members, to the longest thread that had 43 contributions (5557 words) by 14 members.  I have preserved anonymity by changing all online names and taking care to remove any identifying material.  The interview extracts within this paper are from one of twelve interviews carried out with forum members during October 2011 in the Ariege.  All respondents were British, heterosexual, owners of their property and only one did not live full time in France.  The interviews were semi-structured in that questions loosely followed the list of issues to be explored, such as probing how participants felt in relation to other migrants, stereotypes of the British, and their use of the forum.  Free association questions were included to introduce concepts without preconceptions.  ‘Do you feel part of a British community in the Ariege. ’ Some questions used the online forum as a lens through which to study identity representation.  for example, asking ‘Have you asked questions on the forum.  Have you answered them. ’ explored how members represented themselves as established or newcomer forum members.  Some questions elicited responses that related to positioning members of the community according to what kinds of questions they ask, such as ‘How much can you tell about someone from what they write on the forum. ’ Of the twelve interviews, five were joint interviews with a couple, including the interview with Emma and Mitch that is featured within this paper.  Joint interviews have potential for disadvantages.  as Arksey (1996) outlines, women are often inhibited when interviewed as a couple compared with an individual interview.  There may also be friction between views, yet this can be an advantage, since disagreement can lead to more depth of understanding of an issue compared with the interviewer-interviewee dyad.  As this paper demonstrates, the variation and disagreement across responses seen within the interview with Emma and Mitch offers a rich resource for exploring the underlying influence of a value system in narrative discourse.  THEMATIC ANALYSIS OF ONLINE DATA.  Digital technology offers many affordances for lifestyle migrants to take advantage of low-density online support networks.  In the Ariege, the digital forum provided a valuable bridge between members who might live anywhere within the departement.  even if members do not physically meet, they act as resources to access information.  As part of the main study, the nine topic threads underwent thematic analysis that identified themes relevant to the research aims, such as positioning of members and their related traits.  Using co-occurrence tools in Atlas-ti, it was possible to highlight relationships such as where identity codes (for example, POSITIVE SELF-IDENTIFICATION.  POSITIONING OF OTHERS AS OUT-GROUP) occurred with those relating to evaluated migrant behaviour (for example, BRITS WHO DON’T INTEGRATE.  NOT SPEAKING FRENCH).  Members who positioned themselves as experienced often oriented to moral obligations as they advised, warned or reproached othermembers to speak French and socialise with the French community.  The next section discusses some of these themes for what they indicated about the forum’s supportive function and the recurrent evaluations about British migration and the ‘right kind’ of behaviour.  The forum.  Support versus dependence.  The practices of the forumillustrate its generally supportive function formembers negotiating a new life in France.  For some, the ability to ask questions in English would undoubtedly have offered an easier way to get a response compared with using offline community networks that were physically closer but likely to be French.  A common practice was for newcomers to ask for specific information or advice, such as where to find a good school, an English-speaking doctor or vet, or where to buy specific items.  There was anticipation that newcomers would be continuously supplied with information.  one member gave thanks for the advice so far and requested ‘please keep any advice coming’.  Another started a new thread with a general request for advice.  ‘Just wanting to introduce myself really and then get LOADS of advice!!!!!’ Although the very act of choosing to take on a new life demonstrates a degree of agency, there is an obligation within these requests for the existing migrants to help to smooth the journey for the newcomers.  Thismay have been interpreted as an undesirable dependency.  One resident advised a newcomer.  ‘Do not be too dependant on British people’, prompting the response.  ‘We are not going to become dependant on anybody’.  The idea of reliancewas not confined to newcomers, although the longer-standing members articulated it more in terms of ‘comfort’.  it was ‘of some comfort, especially in the middle of winter to sometimes hear other English speaking people and have a conversation with them’, and another spoke of being able to buy British foods as ‘comforting to those of [us] here year round’.  The inherent contradiction with the frequent advice given to integrate was acknowledged by one member who conceded ‘that it is easier and more comforting to mix with the rest of the expat residents’, advising newcomers to ‘try to get a balance between the two’.  The interview analysis demonstrates the complexity of working through such a balance within narrative interaction.  The ‘other’ British.  Themes relating to identity and migration ideologies revealed some explicit associations with particular actions, activities and traits.  The likelihood of Britons arriving without speaking French was often assumed, with advice commonly given that newcomers should ‘learn French’ or speak ‘even bad French’.  Some constructed a symbolic boundary against those who did not attempt to speak the local language.  one member referred to compatriots who lived in the same village using vague language – ‘some other Brits’ – to imply avoidance of communication with these undesirable ‘others’.  Some other Brits moved in to our village & were not well received as they spoke “no” French.  They left after 3 months.  Assumptions about not speaking French often co-occurred with references to dependence.  after a discussion on where to buy furniture that referred to the Toulouse branch of Ikea, Chris appeared to take this as reflecting a tendency to use English-speaking businesses (despite Ikea being Swedish).  You lot will never learn.  If they dont speek [don’t speak] English you are all lost sheep in a huge field By describing the British as ‘lost sheep’, he categorises them as a generalised mass entity with an associated trait of helplessness and failing in their duty to learn the local language.  The theme of SOCIALISING WITH THE FRENCH indicated the perceived importance of not isolating oneself.  this same member listed what he ‘put back into’ the French community and invited others to do the same, and ‘leave the UKers behind’.  Others repeated advice to ‘invite your French neighbours around for a drink’.  One member used repeated structures to negate agency, railing at ‘so many’ arrivals who ‘have not done any homework, they do not know how to survive and they do not know anything about the country or language’, reinforcing a lack of capacity to prepare and integrate.  One member even ascribed traits to a named individual, attacking a new member who had been asking a lot of questions on the forum as someone who wants help with everything because his mind set tells him he can’t.  .  .  He has come to a new country for a new adventure, not to be coddled by the people who have come before him.  He must go out and make mistakes like the rest of us and therefore benefit.  These social actions also construct a boundary between the established members and the needy arrivals.  this writer self-positions as among ‘the rest of us’ who came to France for an adventure.  As symbolic boundaries are constructed against the less desirable ‘other’, they reinforce the distinction between one with capacity to act, against one who perceives no such capacity because ‘his mind set tells he can’t’, and who is ‘coddled’ (over-protected) by the experienced migrants.  These ideological positionings and assumptions represent British migration as a system of binary opposites and as they become reified into an ideology, they offer a powerful resource for affirming social identity within a community where experienced residents have the right to admonish newcomers.  As I will now demonstrate, these themes were present in the joint interview, but they generated some resourceful negotiating where what speakers ‘should’ do, and what they actually did, did not always align.  ANALYSING POSITIONING IN INTERACTION.  This paper takes an approach that is closely aligned to a social constructionist approach to discourse analysis, where language is viewed as ‘the prime site of the construction of the person’ (Burr 2003.  53), performing social actions, including representations of identity.  The approach does not view reality as wholly constructed in discourse, but it does align with the Discourse Analysis tradition in its examination of how language helps to represent a version of reality.  There is no assumption that respondents are consciously representing the world in this way, or even that the attitudes expressed reflect coherence in terms of their positions as individuals or groups within the migration context.  Instead, I explore the complex relationship between self-identification and the prevailing ideological beliefs relating to migrant behaviour.  There is no single definition of narrative, although De Fina and Georgakopoulou (2012) draw some basic distinctions between a focus on temporal ordering, on structural properties and on interactional aspects that view narrative as a situated social practice.  This paper takes the latter perspective, seeing narrative as a way of giving meaning to social experience.  From the starting point of a teller’s representation of actions or events, the analysis looks beyond the narrated event – the story – to a wider view of the story world, where the telling event itself is situated within the interactional context of the interview, as well as the wider sociocultural context.  In the interview extracts of this study, the tellers’ characters are aligned to events in time and space as they describe their use of an online forum and their socialising with locals, but a wider view of the story world invites us to look at the way in which the representation is influenced by experiences, reactions and the immediate interactive context.  This might include negotiating and supporting a particular positioning, to provide ‘evidence’ for how the teller wants to be understood.  As the paper will demonstrate, this can include character positioning within a possible world, whereby hypothetical events are brought in to justify actions and support the teller’s positioning.  Such justification and evidence can also involve the use of argumentation strategies.  as Carranza (2015) notes, these are sometimes intertwined with narration as they develop the story world.  This is particularly relevant when supporting a position that could be ambiguous or contested if the narrated events contradict the ideal positions.  In the extracts below, both narration and argumentation intersect in the construction of a wider story world.  Speakers raise claims of truth and normative rightness (Reisigl and Wodak 2009) to justify their actions within the story itself, which is also situated within a wider story world of British lifestyle migration.  The analysis of truth claims looks for where speakers make statements of epistemic knowledge, presenting evidence of fact (what is, what they are) to support a position.  ‘it’s not through lack of choice’.  Analysis of claims to normative rightness project a common understanding relating to moral standards and obligations, often seen in deontic modality.  ‘you should still integrate’.  An initial coding of the expression of attitudes, values and beliefs was made across the interviews.  A value is an importance attributed to something or someone, whereas an attitude is a participant’s expressed way of thinking or feeling about something or someone.  Attitudes and values relating to migration have been seen to contradict each other, such as where Benson’s (2011) participants dismissed the British community in France yet at the same time took comfort from it.  Beliefs reflect more than an expressed attitude, being how our lived experiences and interpretations contribute to what we believe to be true.  a belief may be presented as less questionable than an attitude.  The excerpts analysed within this paper were selected for how these attitudes, values and beliefs were seen to be in conflict when two speakers oriented to them in quite different ways.  Positioning Theory encompasses a range of tools for analysing language as social practice, particularly where local representations may be motivated by prevailing ideologies of the wider context.  The three-level positioning framework developed for identity work in narration by Bamberg and others (Bamberg 1997.  Bamberg and Georgakopoulou 2008. 