1.  INTRODUCTION.  This article seeks to put a spotlight on the roles of the body and materiality in language and gender socialization, a process that sociolinguists and linguistic anthropologists have traditionally argued takes place largely through language in interaction.  In keeping with this article’s appearance in the themed series, ‘Interaction.  Talk and Beyond,’ we present an analytic innovation.  the use of psychophysiological measures that represent the interaction between the physical and psychological aspects of brain and behavior.  The fields of sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology, and visual anthropology have a longstanding interest in the role of the body in interaction.  Discourse and conversation analysis have long been concerned with the fine-grained texture of interaction itself (Gumperz 1982.  Erickson 1985.  Tannen1984) and the delicate choreographing of physical components of the body with aspects of language such as intonation (Mendoza-Denton and Jannedy 2011).  However, we know relatively little in sociolinguistics about the psychophysiological facets of interaction.  Lab-bound research such as that with Event-Related Potentials (ERPs, small voltage events that occur in the brain in response to specific stimuli and are measured with an electroencephalograph) has long been taking place in psychology and psycholinguistics.  Sociolinguistics has only recently explored ERPs and eye tracking techniques to understand how socio-indexical information influences phoneme recognition as well as sentence and text comprehension (Beddor et al.  2013.  D’Onofrio 2015.  Pickering et al.  2004).  while other areas of linguistics are using MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) and ultrasound to understand, for example, articulation and its relation to phonological structure (Mielke, Baker and Archangeli 2010).  Sympathetic nervous system responses such as increasing heart rate, temperature, blood pressure, and electrodermal activity (EDA) are not currently exploited for what they might tell us in sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology or conversation analysis, and we believe this lacuna arises in part because of the perceived divide between field research and lab research that predominates in these disciplines, with most field sociolinguists considering psychophysiological measurement protocols to be too cumbersome and inhibitory of the naturalistic situations preferred for fieldwork and interviewing.  Here, we must recognize some exceptions in the reading and ESL ﬁelds which take advantage of the relative immobility of reading tasks to measure, for instance, the greater EDA response to ﬁrst vs.  second-language swearing and reprimands (Harris 2004).  There is no a priori reason for our discussion of the relation between language and the body to stop at the surface of the skin, especially given the current availability (indeed, ubiquity) of unobtrusive, portable devices.  As part of audience design, speakers have been shown to deploy ﬁne linguistic and gestural features to carefully ﬁt their language to speciﬁc interlocutors (Bell 1984), and they have also been shown to orient to such displays across multiple interactions (Kendon 1985).  In neighboring ﬁelds such as speech and hearing science, unconscious processes such as breathing have been shown to be tied to interactional events in laboratory situations (Hixon and Hoit 2005).  Within sociolinguistics, we are aware of the ways in which techniques of the body (Mauss 1973) participate in meaning making along with language, primarily through studies of gesture (Goodwin 2000.  Voigt et al.  2016.  inter alia), and through analyses of the body interacting with objects (Shankar and Cavanaugh 2012.  Mondada 2016).  Little attention has been paid as of yet to processes (such as those of the autonomic nervous system) which are largely outside of conscious regulation.  In contrast to sociolinguistics, the ﬁeld of videogame Human Computer Interaction (HCI) has a rich history of exploiting psychophysiological measurements to.  1.  analyze and improve user experience (Ballard and Wiest 1996.  Ravaja et al.  2008).  2.  operationalize the development of biofeedback videogames that rely on interactivity between users and their own biological output.  and 3.  evaluate and implement design choices (Kivikangas et al.  2011).  With regard to product evaluation, the insights resulting from studies of users’ physiological reactions can be employed by videogame developers seeking to quantify aspects of subjective dimensions such as fun, challenge, enjoyment, and boredom (Mandryk, Inkpen and Calvert 2006).  Video game user experience data can additionally elucidate not only individual responses, but also co-participants’ reactions to each other.  Despite difficulties in interpretation (i. e.  do increased heart rate, breathing or sweating have positive or negative valence. ), gaming researchers and engineers assert that psychophysiological measurement provides an ‘objective, continuous, realtime, non-invasive, precise, and sensitive way to assess the game experience’ (Kivikangas et al.  2011.  181).  Meanwhile in the field of quantitative sociolinguistics, the real-time tracking of linguistic consequences of discrete interactional events has enjoyed a surge of interest, particularly in so-called third-wave variationist studies (Eckert 2012).  Such studies often benefit from an ethnographic perspective (Podesva 2006.  Mendoza-Denton 2008.  see also Schilling-Estes 2004), providing rich context that aids in the interpretation of the effects of linguistic variables as they unfold in conversation.  But quantitative sociolinguists are not the only ones who have examined interaction as it unfolds.  in sociology, anthropology, language and communication departments, conversation and discourse analysts have a long history of being centrally concerned with the mutually constitutive nature of talk and action.  As Devyani Sharma observes, ‘interaction is at once fundamentally linguistic and inescapably interdisciplinary [.  .  . ] it creates momentary alliances of bodies, strategies, geographies, and various other signals and positionings’ (2016.  335).  Some of the questions we seek to investigate in this paper include.  • How does materiality of the environment, and especially culturally sedimented features of material objects, serve to structure the interactions of speakers in the world.  • How does gender ideology as materialized in objects affect interaction.  • How are these effects reflected not only at the interactional level but also in physiology.  Answers to these questions can help us to better understand the building blocks not only in talk and at the interactional level, but of gendered marginalization, building on analyses of face-to-face interactional literature such as Goodwin (2006).  The technographic ‘human x machine/tool interaction’ (Ferrin and Kontopodis 2017.  42) case study we present focuses on an interaction with a technological tool.  the Wii-mote, a motion-sensing wireless joystick/remote controller that can simulate the speed and intensity of player movements.  Such a technological artifact is not inherently weighted as masculinist, but becomes intensely so in the nexus within which the affordances of the game hardware and the interactions it propitiates – using the Wii-mote as a stand in for a phallus – serve to discourage and exclude the female player.  In our case, the result is gendered marginalization that takes place within the context of play, joking and laughter.  Thus, we can see how interactions during leisure activities surrounded by positive affect for some of the male players might simultaneously function to marginalize the female player.  And yet, such a use of the Wii-mote as a substitute penis is widespread.  Not only is Wii-mote the controller for one of the best-selling consoles of all time, but it has spawned a string of other games that exploit masturbation mimesis.  Wario Land.  Shake It.  We Dare (a critically underwhelming [Gibson 2011] banned-in-the-U. K.  swinger-avatar game that somehow achieved a 12+ age rating).  Even the current and much-hyped portable console Nintendo Switch has built-in games that earn ‘sexually suggestive’ ratings from review sites (IGN. com 2017).  2.  THEORETICAL BACKGROUND.  In this section, we briefly summarize four relevant strands of literature needed in order to make sense of the data we will present.  The literature on gaming environments for women and girls gives us a glimpse of settings encountered by female gamers.  The second section examines some of the conversation analytic claims about laughter (one of the main features we examine in the interactions we collected), and ﬁnally we discuss psychophysiology and electrodermal activity.  2. 1 Gaming and gender.  In her anthropological account as a participant observer in the World of Warcraft MMORPG (Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game), Bonnie Nardi (2010) provides an analysis of the gendered dynamics of video games, as well as a sobering review of the literature on women and video games.  She notes that many games include elements that are unappealing to women, such as ‘kombat lingerie [.  .  . ] hypersexualized female body types .  .  . ’ (2010.  166) and even off-putting scenarios where players must ‘run around ﬁnding gear to cover their nakedness’ (2010.  166) or operate in environments of ‘surly masculinity’ like the brothels in the game Neverwinter Nights (Mortensen and Corneliussen 2005, as cited in Nardi 2010.  165).  To further her analysis, Nardi relies on the use of the ‘boys’ tree house’ metaphor originally employed by Williams et al.  (2006), referring to a space that is assumed to be a boys-only safe space, where girls are by deﬁnition excluded, and which in some sense describes areas of gamer culture as a whole.  Much of our inspiration in thinking about gender is consonant with thinkers such as Michel Foucault and Judith Butler.  For our purposes, Butler (1988) contributes the notion of performativity, a stance in which gender is not ﬁxed, given or stable, but rather is continuously achieved through performance and repetition.  A related notion was advanced by Gail Jefferson (2004) who considered gender not as a given entity belonging to an individual, but rather as a career, a cumulative trajectory through which individuals play out all their interactions.  We follow Wysocki and Lauteria (2015) in understanding the videogame industry as analyzable through Foucault’s regimes of biopolitics and anatomo-politics (Foucault 2010 [1978]).  Anatomo-politics in this case can be used to consider how the prevalence of sexist language, imagery, and object reference in video games (for examples, see dorkly. com 2017) has resulted in a disciplining of the body, as well as an interpellation, a hailing (Althusser 1971) of women in video games as always/already constituted in degrading ways (Dietz 1998.  Fron et al.  2007).  To give a brief illustration, a recent Python developer conference was plagued by scandal when two male developers were ﬁred for openly making jokes about ‘forking’ and ‘big dongles’ within earshot of a female developer who chose to speak up and posted their picture online (‘forking’ refers ambiguously to both a sexual act and to the development of a new program from open source software, while a ‘dongle’ can be either a hardware connector or a slang word for penis).  The male developers denied interpellating the woman, claimed that they only meant ‘forking’ and ‘dongles’ in the technical sense, and apologized.  As most gender-related matters in the world of gaming though, the controversy was far from over.  the firings were followed by vengeance from Anonymous resulting in multiple DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service – an evil-minded attempt to make a server unavailable) attacks on the server hosting the woman’s blog (Brodkin 2013).  Yes, by now the terms ‘forking’ and ‘dongle’ have technical meanings.  Inescapable, however, is the sexist background from which these terms spring, and the double-entendre that the terms create and which can be covered up in plausible deniability.  The terms and the objects to which they refer are always already entangled with the history of their social naming.  Elsewhere (Mendoza-Denton 2016) we discuss the enregisterment of this gaming interpretation, and its circulation through social media.  The phenomenon of enregisterment, the emergence of recurrent patterns across registers, would be an example of an ideology in the making, an interpretant taking flight through post-mass-media networks.  And yet it is the entanglement between the game designers of Mario Party 8 (mostly male), the iconic function of the Wii-mote, and its use in a (purportedly family-rated) videogame that constitutes an in-group joke, a type of Easter Egg (a secret subroutine found in a video game that, if found, is meant to reward ingenuity on the part of the player), sent across time and space from the male designers of the game to the male players at the other end.  What is the point of the minigame under study then.  The object of the minigame ‘Shake it Up’ within Mario Party 8 is to shake the can (the Wii-mote) as hard as possible, at which point ‘soda’ appears to spurt out from the can.  The person with the highest soda stream is declared the winner.  All of this action is mimed by the Mario character in the game, and the mimetic masturbation this directive produced in the interaction we recorded drew peals of laughter from the men involved in the game.  The patterning of language, laughter and action proved revealing for what it shows about gender relations in the game, and we will see how the emotional and interactional commitment signaled by this joke in the ‘boys’ tree house’ is embodied in participants’ electrodermal responses.  2. 2 Laughter in conversation.  From its earliest writings, the field of conversation analysis has investigated the micro-coordination of interactional patterns of laughter in conversation.  Like all other types of interaction, laughter exhibits ‘order at all points’ (Sacks 1984.  22).  Contrary to popular perceptions of laughter as interrupting normal speech or bursting through in a disorderly way, conversational data supports the idea that, even in what may seem like the abandon of merriment, speakers place laughter precisely (Jefferson 1979.  Glenn 1995).  The occurrence of laughter is projected by both speakers and hearers, and governed by principles more broadly applicable to conversation, such as preference for positive assessments and agreement, commonly exhibited through sharing and joining of laughter (Kangasharju 1996.  Gordon 2003).  Laughter can be thought of as an invitation for joint attention which can be accepted or declined (Jefferson 1979).  Laughing together (or not) is then a joint accomplishment, systematically produced and socially organized (Jefferson, Sacks and Schegloff 1987.  152), whether laughter is accompanying talk about troubles – in which case laughter-joining is dispreferred (Jefferson 1984) – or whether the laughter invites the positive evaluation of a nominated laughable (Glenn 1995).  The gendered pattern of laughter-joining has also aroused the curiosity of researchers.  How, muses Gail Jefferson (2004.  117), is it possible tomake sense of generalizations such as ‘in male-female interaction, if the male laughed, the female would join in, and if the female laughed, the male would not join’.  The cases she presents in that analysis are further abstracted as instances of ‘laughreceptiveness’ and ‘laugh-resistance,’ and it is precisely that receptiveness and resistance that varies by the type of joke and the gendered career of the recipient.  2. 3 Physiology and electrodermal activity.  Physiological reactivity is constantly being regulated by our bodies through our autonomic nervous system.  The system has two components.  the parasympathetic and sympathetic.  The parasympathetic nervous system serves to calm down the body while the sympathetic nervous system stimulates physiological responses.  As individuals engage and interact with their environment, the sympathetic nervous system causes their bodies to react, elevating heart rates, quickening breath or increasing sweat production (Sapolsky 2004.  Dawson, Schell and Filion 2007).  Importantly, the same physiological reactivity also occurs due to psychological factors (Coenen, Coorevits and Lievens 2015.  M€uller and Fritz 2015).  That is, even in the absence of physical activity, cognitive processes can result in physiological reactions just as movement does.  The physiological response we have chosen to examine is called electrodermal activity (EDA) and is the regulation of skin conductance through sweat levels in sweat gland pores.  Increased moisture in sweat ducts lowers resistance for electric currents, increasing the amount of electricity that can flow through the skin (Dawson, Schell and Filion 2007.  Fowles 2008).  EDA is measured in microsiemens (ls), which is a standardmeasurement of electrical conductance.  A rise in EDA levels is also controlled by the sympathetic nervous system.  While EDA does react to physical stimuli – i. e.  doing exercise – it is sensitive enough to document reactivity due to psychological stimuli as well.  These include positive and negative emotions, engagement, and intense focus (Dawson, Schell and Filion 2007.  Coenen, Coorevits and Lievens 2015.  M€uller and Fritz 2015).  While EDA on its own cannot inform researchers of the reason or valence for the response – observations or interviews are needed for that – it indicates time periods when there were sustained high or low levels of reactivity.  We are hypothesizing that the commitment to the joke in the video game – the emotional investment – will be reflected in the body and recordable in the form of the impedance and conductance that make up EDA.  EDA can be examined in two main ways.  tonic levels and phasic responses.  Tonic levels refer to the long-term trends in EDA over a longer period of time (Fowles 2008.  Empatica 2016).  According to Benedek and Kaernbach (2010), the slowly varying tonic activity can be contrasted to the rapid spikes of phasic activity that can be attributed to sudomotor nerve responses within a 1–3 second window following the stimulus, depending on individual reactivity.  A phasic response would be expected to return to its tonic baseline, and can be succeeded by other fast-varying phasic responses.  For example, a phasic response is what one would see in a traditional lab setting where an at-rest participant is exposed to a loud audio stimulus.  Within one to three seconds following the stimulus the EDA data would show a discrete spike indicating reactivity to that specific stimulus.  What makes EDA a useful physiological measure for research looking at multimodal interactions is the new wearable technology that allows physiological data to be collected in ecologically plausible situations.  To measure EDA, we used the Empatica E4 wristband (Empatica 2016) which allows participants to move around freely without being hindered by wired technology, facilitating the capture of real-time streaming EDA data, which can then be usefully combined with observations, video, and comments collected in interviews and debriefings.  Only recently has EDA begun to be used in conjunction with ongoing qualitative research in naturalistic environments.  Eisenhauer (2016) indicates the potential for EDA and ethnographic data to inform each other.  She compiles data into graphic representations called CSP (Context, Subjectivity, Physiology) timelines.  These are images that superimpose ongoing activities and individual subjective commentary on the EDA data (Eisenhauer 2016).  As part of this process, EDA can be used as a participatory visual research tool that can be used to probe participants’ perspectives.  Researchers can review EDA outputs with participants, allowing them to generate their subjective interpretation of moments of heightened physiological activity.  Eisenhauer found that having children and youth view their own EDA output in conjunction with video footage of their participation in activities made for a powerful visualization.  She found that youth were prompted to engage in more in-depth descriptions of what they understood to have been happening and how they felt about the activities.  It also led to conclusions regarding their participation that ran counter to what may have been concluded based on observations or lengthier interview commentary alone.  Although these methods have been longstanding in sociolinguistics (Gumperz [1982] and Tannen [1984] both showed participants videotapes of their interactions), Eisenhauer is the first to pioneer them with EDA outputs.  <Middle> 3.  METHODS.  The larger dataset for this study was collected over the course of a year, and over the span of five gaming sessions.  The first three sessions were conducted from November 2015 to January 2016, and were composed of two unacquainted friendship dyads (four participants in total) playing at any given time.  The last two sessions were conducted from October to November 2016, and were composed solely of dyads.  For the purposes of this article, we focus on the third session,which took place in January 2016.  The sessions were conducted with the initial expectation that they would last one to one and half hours, but during sessions 3, 4, and 5, all participants wished to continue past the expected timeframe.  We attempted to control for gender in the interactions, and invited two male friendship dyads to the session under discussion.  As often happens in the course of research, one of our participants, Joey, did something unexpected.  instead of bringing the male friend that he had said he would bring, he brought a woman named Ruth.  We recorded the interaction anyway, and what was at first an accident of data collection has become the focus of our research.  an interaction skewed numerically by gender (three male subjects and one female subject joined by two male researchers), and, as it turns out, technologically and culturally gender-skewed as well.  The larger interaction under analysis took place over the course of four and half hours, over three rounds of gameplay separated by two intermission periods.  We focus on rounds one and two, lasting around three hours total, and played on Mario Party 8 (Hudson Soft 2007), which, as mentioned above, is a party (co-present multiplayer) game on the Nintendo Wii console that emphasizes group-oriented, motioncontrolled gameplay.  The close interaction analysis of turn-by-turn play and laughter takes place over a segment approximately two minutes in length.  Both friendship dyads were aware that they were going to play with strangers, but they were not introduced until the time of the session.  Each individual player was close friends with one other player (the one in their dyad) and one of the two researchers present, but initial strangers to the other two game participants and the other researcher.  Two of the co-authors of this study,Wilson and Flores, both male, recruited the subjects, ran the study and were present in the room without participating directly in gameplay.  The composition of the players was 75 percent male, and 25 percent female (three men and one woman).  During the session, one participant from each friendship group was asked to wear an Empatica E4 wristband device (we were limited in how many devices we could use by their cost, around US$3,000 at the time of purchase, though we expect they have come down in price).  Although the only woman present was not wearing an Empatica E4 wristband, she later agreed to meet with a female member of the research team (not initially present at the recording session) to recall and reflect on her experiences from playing while looking at the video data that we had compiled from the session.  The insights gained from the post-game interview will round out the presentation of our conversational data.  3. 1 Equipment.  The Empatica E4 wristband is a wireless, real-time monitor that measures a wide range of physiological signals.  In addition to the EDA sensor, it has a skin temperature monitor and a photoplethysmograph (PPG) that measures Blood Volume Pulse (BVP), from which heart rate, heart rate variability, and other cardiovascular measures are derived.  The E4 also has an Event Mark Button that allows users to intentionally ‘tag events and correlate them with physiological signals’ (Empatica 2016), and an application feature that provides a live-streaming feed for researchers to monitor activity in real-time and for up-to-date measurements that are synchronized to a secured, online database.  3. 2 Data setting.  Data collection took place in a ‘game room’ located within a redesigned faculty office on the UCLA Campus.  This was to closely simulate an environment of familiarity and comfort (as opposed to a more impersonal laboratory setting) while effectively eliminating the chance of passing visitors.  Our redesign consisted of separating one side of the office (used for its intended academic purposes) from the game room section by high drapes, while furniture was rearranged to evoke a cozy college dorm room (comfy couch, large TV screen, pizza provided) in order for participants to experience minimal distraction during gameplay.  Participants sat on a couch on one side of the wall facing a series of 32” flat-screen televisions, accompanied by an atomic clock and a wide-angle lens camera (Figure 1).  The ‘front’ camera was designed to capture and record the movements of the participants during gameplay, while a ‘back’ camera, placed behind the players facing the television, would simultaneously capture all gameplay footage.  As per the findings of Mendoza-Denton et al.  (2009), we did not place posters on the wall that might exhibit gender prejudice and thus affect our interactions.  3. 3 The participants.  Participants were recruited according to the following criteria.  1.  They were native English speakers, friends, and willing to come together as a friendship-pair.  2.  They had some prior experience in playing, understanding basic game controls and game mechanics.  It was not necessary for them to have previously played any of the games presented in the study.  3.  They were interested in playing in a study environment.  This included having two researchers in the room during the session.  4.  The pairs were amenable to playing with a pair of strangers for the duration of the session.  Participants consented to the use of their undoctored video footage, but agreed to the modification of their names.  Participants were not compensated save for food and drinks provided during the study to further simulate dorm-room play.  Before the session began, players were asked a series of background questions, including their history of videogame playing.  their relationship to communities oriented around playing videogames – online or offline gaming forums.  frequency of play, and history of playing with their accompanying friend.  At the end of the session, players were asked some basic questions about their overall impressions of the gaming sessions, any particular moments that they felt emotionally responsive to, and how this may have been influenced by the presence of other participants.  During the session, players were encouraged to stop at any point if they wished to ask any questions or to address any concerns that they may have experienced while participating.  A brief description of each participant is necessary to provide context.  1.  Ruth (Group 1), 20, is a Latina student at UCLA, from South Central Los Angeles.  she is the only female participant present during the gaming session.  She considers herself a casual gamer during school, but plays more frequently when on break.  She has limited experience with Mario Party, and has traditionally disliked first-person shooter games.  She is not involved in online gaming communities beyond looking up general information.  2.  Joey (Group 1) is a 20-year-old African-American male, from Inglewood, California, who is a student at UCLA.  He considers himself a semi-avid player.  although his playtime also varies depending on school.  He prefers to play local games with friends, but occasionally plays online against strangers.  He is familiar with the Mario Party franchise, and not involved in online communities beyond looking up general information.  3.  Bob (Group 2) is a 23-year-old Egyptian-American male, from California, living locally.  He considers himself an avid player, familiar with both the Mario Party and Call of Duty franchise.  He participates in online videogame communities through social media.  Although he plays with strangers regularly online, he prefers to play with close friends.  4.  Ross (Group 2) is a 30-year-old Native-American male from California, living locally.  Like his friend Bob, Ross considers himself an avid player, familiar with the Mario Party franchise.  He also participates in online communities, but tends to play games with close friends only.  After the groups were introduced to one another and were asked the initial interview questions, participants began the first round on Mario Party.  Round 1 was a standard, two-versus-two game on medium difficulty.  The teams were Ruth and Joey on team 1, and Bob and Ross on team 2.  Without instruction from the research team, the participants sat next to each other for the first round, with Ross on the far left, Bob at the center left, Joey at center right, and Ruth on the far right (Figure 2).  After the first intermission period, the teams were switched, and round 2 began.  In this round we asked that Ruth pair up with Bob, and that Joey pair up with Ross.  As we will see in the discussion of the EDA later in the paper, the separation of Ruth from her friend Joey had consequences for Joey’s physiology.  But first let us analyze an approximately one-minute interaction where speakers ‘shake it up. ’ 4.  TRIANGULATING OUR DATA In order to make our argument, we will be presenting three different kinds of related data in this section.  1.  conversation analytic data.  2.  post-game debriefing interview data.  and 3.  electrodermal activity (EDA) data.  The conversation analytic transcription and video data come from the section in which much of the initial Shake it Up gameplay occurred.  We selected these segments for their remarkable display of the theoretical ‘boys’ tree house’ arrangement described in the literature.  We selected those incidents before identifying the EDA data following those segments for further analysis.  The electrodermal activity data comes from portions immediately following that brief first game-play and following the reshuffling of the seating of the subjects (recall that although EDA has a relatively fine granularity, it is still not exactly time-aligned to the stimuli.  it has a latency response of 1–3 seconds, variable in time and magnitude for each speaker, so as far as possible we try to compare speakers to themselves).  The post-game debriefing interview occurred two weeks after the event, and only one speaker (Ruth) was available for that.  4. 1 Analyzing laughter.  Our first data set involves analyzing interaction among the participants playing the Mario Party 8 game ‘Shake it Up’.  We produced a conversation analytic transcript of the event, along with the short periods leading up to it and following it, and we analyzed it for interactional clues that might allow us to understand Ruth’s participation in this sexualized interaction.  Our analysis will be focused on laughter, utilizing transcription conventions as per Jefferson (1984.  see the Appendix).  Consider the following excerpt, from the first time the participants play the mini-game.  Excerpt 1.  Shake it Up Players are playing Mario Party 8.  The randomized mini-game lands on ‘Shake It Up. ’ See the bottom of Figure 3 for an image of what participants see on-screen.  The players in this excerpt respond to game selection and discuss the game controls.  1.  Joey.  ↑O. . . H I li[ke this. . ] 2.  Ruth.  [°Shake it uh. hp°] 3.  Joey.  = oh yah you’d jus[ (. ) da shake th- jus (. ) shake]= 4.  Ruth.  >°[Shake it uhp shake it uhp↑]°< ((continued melodic intonation)) 5.  Ruth.  >which one. < ((Mario mimes up and down motion within game)) 6.  Joey.  = (0. 5) >as fast as-< jus- shake da7.  Ruth.  you gotta jerk it.  ((to Joey with smiling voice)) 8.  Joey.  yeah. .  (. ) I- I mean (. ) tsh [ha-] ha ((smiling voice)) 9.  Ross.  [if] you want to SAY it [like THATL*+H GO aheadL-L%] 10.  Ruth.  I- I didn’t mean it like that ((serious voice)) 11.  Ruth.  You’re the one who took into connotation 12.  Joey.  WELL HACTUA. HHHLLY [↑I said shake] 13.  Ross.  [°<Yeah> I am°] 14.  Bob.  I me. . . hhhan-uh (. ) there’s a bunch of [[. hhhdifferent wa]]ys.  [you’d could].  have.  .  .  . hhh 15.  Joey.  [[inaudible laughter. , mouth in shirt]] 16.  Bob.  [[inaudible laughter.  cough. , covering mouth]] In this excerpt, Joey and Ruth, who are best friends and sitting next to each other, assess the possibility that they will be playing this potentially embarrassing game together.  When Joey’s speech starts to slow down and he exhibits pausing hesitation in line 3, Ruth invites Joey to laugh with her, teasing him by pretending not to know the game, and in the end making overt the sexual connotation by saying ‘You gotta jerk it. ’ with a smiling voice in line 7.  The sequence plays out with both of these speakers looking at the screen but aligning their bodies toward each other.  By line 8, Joey has accepted both the collaborative completion of the joke and the invitation to laugh.  At this point Ross, who is sitting at the furthest end of the couch, invites himself into the joke by saying sarcastically to Ruth.  ‘If you want to say it like that, go ahead. ’ The intonation in this utterance is salient, and we’ve transcribed it in the ToBI system as a L*+H contour that Pierrehumbert and Hirschberg (1990) have analyzed as indicating a lack of commitment to a scale, while Calhoun and Schweitzer (2012) have analyzed it as a downplayer when a speaker offers a controversial opinion, all of which fits with our interpretation of Ross inviting himself into Ruth and Joey’s joke.  Ruth, however, rejects Ross’s joking intervention with a serious voice in lines 10–11, firmly declining to laugh.  Joey tries in line 12 to repair the face-threat to Ross implied by Ruth’s dispreferred decline of his volunteered alignment, while Ross responds curtly to Ruth in line 13.  After the attempted joke short circuits, both Joey and Bob cover their faces, possibly laughing or coughing (Figure 3).  We understand this temporary stepping away from the interaction as significant in that it gives speakers a chance to restart what may have been an unsuccessful bid for mutual alignment.  After this point, the game begins and the participants play.  We pick the transcript back up after the game has declared Bob the winner.  Note that in the lower half, Mario is holding a Wii-mote, shaking it up andExcerpt 2.  After the minigame is finished, and Bob has won .  .  .  109.  Ross.  [TH . hhh ERE was] no way anyone was gonna beat = 110.  Ruth.  [What. ] 111.  Ross.  =him in that [[game (. ) OK. ]] hhh . hhh= 112.  Ruth.  [[what.  ((slight smiling towards Ross, then shaking her head side-to-side while mouthing words)) ]] 113.  Ross.  = for L[IFE] ha ha ha 114.  Ruth.  [°my god°] ((mouthing out words)) 115.  Bob.  [HE HA HA] ha ha . hhh . hhh hu. ugh ((covers mouth with shirt to cough)) 116.  Joey.  (inaudible) ((smiles while looking down)) 117.  Bob.  . hhh . hhh . hhh HA . hhh guh- hu ((coughing)) 118.  Cory.  (inaudible laughter) ((researcher.  laughter)) 119.  Wesley.  dhe [ha aha ha ha ha ha ha [[eha]= ((researcher.  laughter)) 120.  Ross.  = ((response to Cory, pointing at him and laughing)) 121.  Bob.  [ha ha [[ha ha]] ha hah ha . hhh] ((laughter responding to Ross and Cory, then Bob turns refocuses attention to the game. )) 122.  Ruth.  [[(inaudible)]] ((mouthing words)) 123.  Ross.  [. hhh] 124.  Joey.  [It] said we need fifty.  From lines 109–124, after Bob’s win, there would appear to be generalized laughter all around, with even the male researchers joining in the merriment.  Looking more closely though, and as annotated in parentheses, we can see that despite Ross’ proffered jokes (110, 111) invitations to laugh (115, 117, 119, 121), and opportunities to jointly assess volunteered laughables (113), Ruth has repeatedly declined to join laughter (lines 114, 122).  Ruth looks straight ahead at the screen.  All the while, Bob’s laughter spawns a coughing fit, Ross laughs so hard he begins to cry, and that friendship pair pull researchers Cory and Wesley into the sequence by physically pointing at them.  Between lines 112 and 121, their loud laughing is co-produced and jointly patterned, while Joey and Ruth vaguely smile but appear to decline to join in. 