INTRODUCTION.  Compared to avenues for linguistic variation like accent, spelling, or word choice, the indexical potential of script has only recently become a topic of empirical inquiry.  This is not necessarily surprising, as script selection is rare or even non-existent in many languages.  In English, for example, distinct populations with contrasting pronunciations, spelling standards, and/or vocabulary preferences are still united in their use of the Roman script.  However, a growing body of research has evidenced many cases where selection from competing scripts can become a target of metalinguistic discussion and socially meaningful use (Sebba 2009, 2012).  In actions like the development of the Deseret alphabet by Mormons in America, the rejection of imposed scripts and/or celebration of native scripts by writers of Korean or Cherokee, and even in the adoption of the German-associated Blackletter by English-speaking heavy metal bands to index militarism or machismo, we see clear examples of script acting as a marker of distinct social groups and/or ideologically associated traits (Bender 2008.  Brown and Yeon 2015.  Harkness 2015.  Spitzm€uller 2012, 2015.  Thompson 1982).  The indexical potential of script selection is particularly interesting when discussing written Japanese.  In most writing systems, script selection is somewhat analogous to dialect, as distinct communities utilize distinct methods of producing the same language (Unseth 2005).  For instance, many languages spoken in India are written in multiple scripts, but an author generally uses a single script exclusively when writing a text (Choksi 2014).  The contemporary Japanese writing system departs from this script/dialect analogy, as it instead necessitates the combined use of multiple scripts within a sentence.  In particular, three scripts known as kanji, hiragana, and katakana are found within almost any contemporary text not written for children.  Although the use of the three scripts generally follows codified standards, almost any element of the Japanese language can be (and, indeed, has been) written in each script (Konno 2015).  Consequently, the Japanese writing system allows for variation in script use on a ‘scale which is inconceivable in the case of more familiar [to Western readers] writing systems’ (Backhouse 1984.  220). 