 The issue of implicit and explicit knowledge and learning mechanisms has attracted attention from many second language acquisition (SLA) researchers because of its theoretical and educational implications (e. g. , Hulstijn, 2005).  To tackle the issues surrounding explicit and implicit knowledge and learning (e. g. , interface issues), the methodological problem of measuring implicit knowledge is crucial (Suzuki & DeKeyser, 2017).  Explicit and implicit knowledge are distinguished based on awareness.  implicit knowledge is deployed without awareness, whereas explicit knowledge requires some level of awareness (DeKeyser, 2003.  Williams, 2009).  Previous SLA studies have shown empirically that explicit and implicit knowledge are distinct constructs that can be measured separately (Bowles, 2011.  R.  Ellis, 2005.  Gutiérrez, 2013.  Zhang, 2015).  A recent study, however, employed a more ﬁnely tuned psycholinguistic technique to examine real-time grammar processing and cast doubt on the validity of existing implicit knowledge measures (Suzuki & DeKeyser, 2015.  Vafaee, Suzuki, & Kachinske, 2017).  The present paper reports a construct validation study of a new battery of ﬁnely tuned tests for implicit knowledge.  the eye-tracking-while-listening task, the wordmonitoring task, and the self-paced reading task.  These real-time comprehension tasks were compared with the existing tasks that have been claimed to measure implicit knowledge, for example, timed grammaticality judgment tests (GJT), which were hypothesized to draw more on automatized explicit knowledge in this study.  PROBLEMS IN PREVIOUS MEASURES OF “IMPLICIT” KNOWLEDGEA seminal study by R.  Ellis (2005, 2009) developed three tests that were hypothesized to measure implicit knowledge.  an oral narrative task, a timed GJT, and an elicited imitation (EI) task.  Since these tasks were performed under time pressure, Ellis claimed that second language (L2) learners are more likely to draw on implicit knowledge.  He conducted a conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) and demonstrated that these time-pressured tests were loaded onto a separate factor from an explicit knowledge factor that untimed tests were loaded onto (i. e. , an untimed GJT and a metalinguistic knowledge test).  This ﬁnding was essentially replicated in subsequent studies with different L2 populations (Ercetin & Alptekin, 2013.  Gutiérrez, 2013.  Sarandi, 2015.  Zhang, 2015) and a heritage learner population (Bowles,The critical methodological factor that differentiated “implicit” knowledge from “explicit” knowledge in those studies was imposing time pressure on the language tests.  however, time pressure cannot necessarily limit access to explicit knowledge enough to ensure that implicit knowledge is drawn upon (DeKeyser, 2003. 