Intro.  Bilingual children are commonly categorized as either simultaneous or sequential (Goldstein, ), although the age criteria deﬁning each group vary among researchers.  Without controversy, children who learn two languages from birth are designated as simultaneous bilinguals (Padilla & Lindholm, ), but so have been those who learn two languages within the ﬁrst year after birth (Genesee, Paradis & Crago, ), or even up to age three (McLaughlin, ).  Following McLaughlin, we identify children exposed to both languages before three years of age as ‘simultaneous bilinguals’, or, simply, bilingual children.  Phonetic category formation in the sense of this paper refers to the processes by which bilingual or second language (L) speakers come to distinguish phonetic details of shared phonemes in each language (Flege & Eefting, .  Flege, .  Yeni-Komshian, Flege & Liu, ).  For example, Spanish and English share the phoneme /p/, but /p/ in each language is produced with diﬀerent voice-onset-time (VOT) values.  Thus, it is an interesting question whether bilingual or L speakers exhibit accurate phonetic realizations of Spanish /p/ and English /p/ when speaking the two languages.  While phonetic category formation in production has been investigated extensively in adult bilingual and L speakers (see Flege, .  Bohn & Munro, , for more information), little such research has been carried out with bilingual children, although more robust ﬁndings have been reported in the perceptual domain.  The purpose of this study was to determine whether three-year-old Korean–English bilingual (KEB) children fully distinguish stop and vowel categories in their productions of the two languages, and how these two systems interact with each other.  Whether bilingual children develop one versus two linguistic systems in the learning of their respective languages has long been of interest to bilingual researchers (Swain, .  Padilla & Liebmann, .  Volterra & Taeschner, .  Genesse, .  Goodz, ).  Although dominant findings support the notion that bilingual children do operate with two systems, the question has not been fully investigated in the phonetic domain among young bilingual children (i. e.  three-year-olds) due to methodological limitations (e. g.  sample size).  In particular, most such studies examined the two-way voiced and voiceless stop contrasts of English–Spanish or English–German bilingual children.  But it is not clear whether similar characteristics are found among KEB children because Korean has a three-way laryngeal manner contrast in stops.  Moreover, previous studies examining the phonetic categories of young bilingual children investigated either stops or vowels, not both systems simultaneously, leaving open the question of whether these develop in tandem or in sequence.  More recent attention has been paid to examining the degree of interaction between the two languages of bilingual children (Paradis, ), and several hypotheses have been proposed.  Positing three types of interdependence (transfer, acceleration, delay), Paradis and Genesee () hypothesized that the grammars of bilingual children are acquired autonomously during the acquisition process.  Conversely, Johnson and Lancaster () concluded that the features of one language may influence those of the other.  While most research on this issue has dealt with the lexical, syntactic, and phonological domains, the present study pursues the question with respect to phonetic properties.  English and Korean stops and vowels Before turning to the existing literature in phonetic category formation, we briefly review the phonetics of stops and front vowels in Korean and English.  The Korean and English stop systems are compared in Table .  Korean contrasts three manners of stops, all of which are voiceless in word-initial position, but these differ with respect to degree of aspiration and f in the following vowel (Kang & Guion, ).  The three Korean stop types are often called ‘lenis’, ‘aspirated’, and ‘fortis’.  The VOT periods of lenis and aspirated stops are longer than for fortis stops, while the f values of aspirated and fortis stops are higher than for lenis stops (Cho, Jun & Ladefoged, .  Silva, .  Oh, ).  Among adult male speakers (Oh, ), Korean lenis stops are produced with moderate-lag VOT (– ms) and low f (– Hz), aspirated with long-lag VOT (– ms) and high f (– Hz), and fortis with short-lag VOT (–  ms) and high f (– Hz).  Recent research shows that the VOT values for phrase-initial lenis and aspirated stops are converging among contemporary, younger Seoul speakers, who distinguish these now only by f (Silva, .  Iverson & Park, ).  Unlike Korean, in word/phrase initial position English contrasts just two stop categories, usually characterized as ‘voiced’ versus ‘voiceless’ (see Iverson & Salmons, , for interpretation of these as ‘lax’ versus ‘aspirated’).  These contrasts are also reliably differentiated by VOT.  Thus, Lisker and Abramson () reported that English voiceless stops are produced with long-lag VOT ( ms) and voiced stops with short-lag VOT ( ms).  Similar to Korean stops, moreover, f plays a role in differentiating voiceless from voiced stops in English (Whalen, Abramson, Lisker & Mody, ) in that the former are often associated with higher f than the latter.  There are five front vowels in English, all unrounded.  /i ɪ e ε æ/.  These subcategorize as either tense (/i e/) or lax (/ɪ ε æ/) (Ladefoged, ).  Korean monophthongal vowels, on the other hand, include just two front unrounded vowels.  /i ε/.  An additional mid front unrounded monophthongal vowel, /e/, has merged with /ε/ in the speech of most Koreans, resulting in a contemporary system of seven monophthongs overall (see Lee & Iverson, , for more information).  Unlike English, the Korean vowel system does not make a tense–lax distinction (e. g.  /i/ vs. The acoustic features of corresponding Korean and English vowels are manifested diﬀerently (Yang, ).  In general, F values of English vowels are higher than those of Korean vowels for both male and female speakers.  For male speakers, the ﬁve English front vowels occupy vowel space distinct from the two Korean front vowels /i ε/.  For female speakers, however, English and Korean /ε/ are produced in the same vocalic space, though Korean /i/ remains distinct from the other English vowels.  Stop and vowel development in monolingual children.  Stop and vowel development in monolingual English- and Korean-learning children has been well established.  Literature reports that English-learning children stabilized voiced and voiceless stop phonemes at – months and – months, respectively (Macken & Barton, .  Lowenstein & Nittrouer, ).  After reviewing ten studies of phonological development, Bernthal, Bankson, and Flipsen () summarized that English voiced and voiceless phonological stop categories are fully developed by age three.  In comparison to English, age of acquisition for Korean stop contrasts appears to vary.  Kim and Stoel-Gammon () reported that accuracy for stops produced by monolingual Korean children was less than % at four years of age, arguing that Korean children distinguished stops mainly by VOT, with f classiﬁcation emerging at around . .  The accuracy of Korean stops reported in Kim and Stoel-Gammon was lower than the previous studies (Kim, .  Kim & Pae, ), where % of stops were accurately produced by two to three years of age.  These discrepancies may be due to the sample size.  Kim and Stoel-Gammon () included only ten children per age group.  Unlike stops, the literature consistently reports that both English and Korean vowel distinctions are fully implemented by age three.  Larkins () collected  spontaneous utterances from each of twenty children between  and  months of age.  All English monophthongs, except for /ɪ/ and [ɚ] (< /ər/), were produced with % accuracy.  Even these two vowels were produced with % accuracy.  Pollock and Berni () also reported a high percentage correct (%) of non-rhotic vowels for – -month-old normally developing children.  For Korean, Kwon () found that all vowels were produced with % accuracy at age . .  At age . , /a i u ε/ were produced with % accuracy, the others (/o ɨ ʌ/) with better than % accuracy.  Thus, the ﬁndings of previous studies indicate that both monolingual English- and Korean-learning children were able to produce the stops and vowels of their native languages with high accuracy by three years of age.  Although cross-linguistic studies may provide a basis for understanding the speech of bilingual children, they have mainly been limited to babbling (Boysson-Bardies, Halle, Sagart & Durand, .  Whalen, Levitt & Goldstein, .  Rvachew, Alhaidary, Mattock & Polka, ).  Only a few studies have examined early word production cross-linguistically.  Chung, Kong, Edwards, Weismer, Fourakis, and Hwang () conducted a cross-linguistic examination of the three ‘corner’ vowels /i a u/ in English, Cantonese, Korean, Japanese, and Greek children and adults in order to identify cross-linguistic diﬀerences in the acoustic realization of the three shared vowels.  They found that children as young as two years of age demonstrated language-speciﬁc characteristics in their vowel spaces.  Speciﬁcally, Cantonese /i/ and /u/ vowels were more peripherally located in the vowel space whereas those of English and Japanese were more centralized.  Lee and Iverson (, ) also investigated whether cross-linguistic differences appear in the vowel and stop productions of monolingual English-speaking and Korean-speaking children at ages five and ten, and reported that both vowels and stops reflected differences between English and Korean to some degree.  English-speaking children as young as five years demonstrated higher F values for the back vowel /u/ than Korean-speaking children, similar to adults (Yang, ).  Stops produced by the five- and ten-year-old monolingual English- and Korean-speaking children also showed some distinctive characteristics.  For example, five-year-old children produced Korean aspirated stops with longer VOT than English voiceless stops.  however, they produced English voiced stops and Korean fortis stops similarly in terms of both VOT and f.  In addition, Lee and Iverson () found that in five-year-old monolingual children, the five stop categories across English and Korean were not fully separated acoustically, whereas ten-year-old monolingual children distinguished all ﬁve categories.  It is of interest, then, to investigate the cross-linguistic acoustic characteristics of bilingual children younger than ﬁve years of age.  Stop and vowel development in bilingual children A number of production accuracy studies of bilingual toddlers have been undertaken, but the majority of these have dealt with Spanish–English bilingual (SEB) children.  Goldstein and Washington () examined English and Spanish stops produced by four-year-old SEB children and found that production accuracy of English stops (%) and Spanish stops (%) was similar to monolingual English-speaking (·%) or Spanish-speaking children (%). 