Children with speciﬁc language impairment (SLI) are characterized by a marked deﬁcit in language development despite apparently typical intellectual, sensory, and social abilities and neurological state.  This deﬁcit may affect both expressive and receptive language in both lexical and grammatical domains.  One of the central areas of difﬁculty in children with SLI is sentence comprehension, particularly evident in complex sentences (e. g. , Bishop, Bright, James, Bishop, & van der Lely, 2000.  Norbury, Bishop, & Briscoe, 2002.  van der Lely, 1996, 1998.  van der Lely & Harris, 1990.  van der Lely & Stollwerck, 1997).  Some argue that problems in sentence comprehension (alongside other language difﬁculties) are caused by a deﬁcit in the innate representation of grammar (Rice, Wexler, & Redmond, 1999.  van de Lely, 2005), while others claim that factors external to grammar such as weaknesses in working memory (Ellis Weismer & Thordardottir, 2002.  Joannisse & Seidenberg, 1998.  Montgomery, 1995, 2000, 2004.  Montgomery & Evans, 2009.  Montgomery, Magimairaj, & Finney, 2010.  Norbury et al. , 2002), auditive perception (Tallal & Piercy, 1973), or the general slowing of processing (Kail, 1994.  Leonard et al. , 2007.  Miller, Kail, Leonard, & Tomblin, 2001.  Windsor & Hwang, 1999) can account for the observed problems.  Sentences containing an anaphoric expression like a reﬂexive or a pronoun are among complex sentence types that might be problematic for children with SLI, and they are also good candidates for investigating different sources of language difﬁculties.  The correct interpretation of anaphoric expressions depends upon another expression in context.  It requires knowledge of clausal structure and syntactic dependencies, but it also builds on processing distant constituents, burdening working memory.  In many cases, it requires selection among several candidates, relying on cognitive control.  Thus, this domain of grammatical processing is a good focus of study for examining the contribution of linguistic and extralinguistic cognitive factors to language processing.  Although these factors make sentences with anaphoric expressions a good testing ground for disentangling different accounts of language impairment, as far as we are aware, there are only three studies that investigate anaphor interpretation in children with SLI (Montgomery & Evans, 2009.  Novogrodsky & Friedman, 2010.  van der Lely & Stollwerck, 1997).  Van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997) investigated the interpretation of pronouns and reﬂexives to ﬁnd out whether intrasentential reference assignment is impaired in children with SLI, and what the underlying causes of the impairment are.  Using a sentence–picture veriﬁcation task to test 12 English-speaking children with SLI aged between 9 years, 3 months (9. 3) and 12. 10 years and three language control groups, they observed signiﬁcantly lower levels of performance in children with SLI than in any of the TD groups.  They concluded that children with SLI show a modular language deﬁcit concerning dependent structural relationships between syntactic constituents.  Montgomery and Evans (2009)’s main aim was the investigation of the relationship between working memory and sentence comprehension.  In their sentence comprehension task, they used a shorter version of van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997)’s design involving pronouns and reﬂexives, and they also tested comprehension of passive sentences in a sentence–picture veriﬁcation task.  They tested 24 English-speaking children with SLI aged between 6 and 12 years and two TD groups.  They did not report results for sentences with anaphors separately, but the total scores were signiﬁcantly lower in children with SLI than in age-matched TD children and similar to scores in the control group of language and memory matched TD children (see more details about the study below in the Sentence Comprehension and Working Memory in Children With SLI section).  In Novogrodsky and Friedman (2010)’s study, interpretation of pronouns and reﬂexives was tested together with comprehension of complex sentences involving wh-movement in a picture selection task in 12 Hebrew-speaking children with SLI aged between 9. 3 and 13. 10 and control children.  Their objective was to ﬁnd out whether different kinds of dependencies can be selectively impaired or the deﬁcit involves all of them.  While children in the SLI group showed impairments in the interpretation of sentences involving wh-movement relative to TD children, no group differences were observed in anaphor interpretation, suggesting the possibility of selective impairments.  The apparent controversy in the above ﬁndings may result from methodological differences.  Impairments in anaphor interpretation were observed in the two studies relying on sentence–picture veriﬁcation (Montgomery & Evans, 2009.  van der Lely & Stollwerck, 1997).  this measure could be more sensitive to complex sentence comprehension differences than choosing the picture that matches the sentence out of two candidates.  The two studies that found signiﬁcant differences between the SLI and TD groups took different theoretical approaches and thus drew different conclusions concerning the source of difﬁculties in anaphor interpretation in SLI.  Van der Lely and Stollwerck (1997) argue that difﬁculties with anaphor interpretation are a consequence of a grammar-speciﬁc deﬁcit (in the binding module of grammar.  see below).  In contrast, Montgomery and Evans (2009) propose that anaphor comprehension deﬁciencies are secondary to reduced complex working memory capacity in children with SLI.  Our goal in the present study was to explore whether anaphor comprehension is problematic in Hungarian children with SLI, and to identify possible sources of the potential deﬁcit in antecedent assignment.  In what follows, we will review the generative linguistic account of anaphor interpretation, psycholinguistic models of anaphor comprehension based on online sentence comprehension studies, and various accounts of difﬁculties with anaphor processing.  We will also discuss previous work on the associations between working memory and sentence comprehension in SLI.  We then clarify the concept of cognitive control, and go on to discuss the potential role of cognitive control in anaphor interpretation in children with SLI.  SYNTACTIC FACTORS IN ANAPHOR INTERPRETATION.  Within generative grammar, the interpretation of anaphors is accounted for by binding theory (Chomsky, 1981, 1986).  In binding theory, there are two main syntactic principles (Principles A and B) that constrain potential antecedents for reﬂexives and pronouns.  Binding Principle A states that a reﬂexive must be bound in its governing category, which means that the reﬂexive has to have a c-commanding antecedent within the same governing category.  In contrast, pronouns cannot be bound within the same clause according to Binding Principle B but should corefer with a suitable discourse element in the context.  Thus, the antecedent of the reﬂexive herself must be Mary in (1a), whereas the antecedent of the pronoun her cannot be Mary in (1b).  From the perspective of processing, these principles express the syntactic locality conditions of binding that presuppose the recognition of the different types of anaphors.  Chien and Wexler (1990) and Grodzinsky and Reinhart (1993) argue that sentences with a pronoun have two logical interpretations.  when the pronoun (e. g. , her in (1b)) is coindexed with the subject of the clause (Mary in (1b)) and when it is not.  They propose that the correct interpretation has to be computed with the help of a pragmatic principle (see more details in the next section) that makes pronouns more difﬁcult to interpret than reﬂexives.  However, according to Chien and Wexler (1990) if the antecedent is a quantiﬁer, only one interpretation is possible, because coindexation with a quantiﬁer is only possible with a variable bound by (i. e. , being in the same clause with) that quantiﬁer.  For this reason, in these cases the processing of the pronoun will not be more difﬁcult than the processing of reﬂexives.  PROCESSING ANAPHORS IN SENTENCES.  An increasing number of studies investigate when and how the abovementioned syntactic constraints take effect during anaphor processing, relying on online sentence comprehension methods (priming, self-paced reading, eye-tracking during reading, and eye-tracking during listening), mainly in adults.  Some of the ﬁndings suggest that the adult parser only considers syntactically appropriate antecedents (those which are in accordance with Principle A and B) but not structurally inappropriate ones (e. g. , Nicol & Swinney, 1989).  This view is usually called the early ﬁlter hypothesis.  Other online sentence comprehension studies however argue for the multiple constraints approach (e. g. , Badecker & Straub, 2002), proposing that syntactic and discourse factors affect anaphor processing simultaneously.  According to the latter view during the course of sentence processing, several potential antecedents are activated in the discourse context beyond the syntactically appropriate antecedent, and the inappropriate one(s) is/are ruled out later during processing.  In the multiple constraints approach, this process controls the interpretation of both pronouns and reﬂexives, but empirical evidence on the activation of multiple potential antecedents is only available for pronouns in the majority of studies (e. g. , Runner, Sussman, & Tanenhaus, 2003).  Results about reﬂexives are less consistent.  Some studies have found no evidence for the activation of syntactically incorrect potential antecedents in the case of reﬂexives (cross-modal priming.  Nicol, 1988.  Nicol & Swinney, 1989.  eye tracking during listening.  Clackson, Felser, & Clahsen, 2011.  event-related potential.  Xiang, Dillon, & Phillips, 2009), while other results support the activation of multiple potential antecedents for reﬂexives as well (self-paced reading.  Badecker & Straub, 2002.  eye-tracking during reading.  Cunnings & Felser, 2013.  eye-tracking during listening.  Clackson & Heyer, 2014).  Although Clackson and Heyer (2014) also emphasize that the effect is stronger in the case of pronouns, they argue that the lack of evidence for multiple potential antecedents during reﬂexive processing in other studies is due to a methodological ﬂaw.  Overall, online sentence comprehension studies suggest that when there is a prominent potential antecedent in the discourse context during the processing of reﬂexives and pronouns, the processing system does not rule it out immediately even if it is inappropriate based on binding principles.  This effect seems to be stronger in the case of pronouns, especially when the other potential antecedent(s) is/are not quantiﬁed noun(s).  Most of the above online studies tested adults.  ofﬂine studies suggest changes in anaphor comprehension during development.  The results show that while children are already quite successful at interpreting reﬂexives at age 3, they make mistakes with pronouns until age 6 (Chien & Wexler, 1990.  Guasti, 2002.  Perovic, Modyanova, & Wexler, 2013.  Rákosi & Tóth, 2016), but if the competing antecedent is a quantiﬁed noun, the difference between pronouns and reﬂexives decreases (Chien & Wexler, 1990).  Clackson et al.  (2011) investigated developmental changes in anaphor resolution with an eye-movement monitoring during listening paradigm in children (6–9 years) and in adults.  Participants were auditorily presented with two-sentence paragraphs with either reﬂexives or pronouns at the end of the second sentences.  Both the ﬁrst and the second sentence contained an animate character.  In the double match condition, the gender of the two characters matched each other and the gender of the anaphor as well (2a).  In the single match condition, the anaphor only matched its antecedent (the proper noun of the ﬁrst sentence in the case of pronouns and the proper noun of the second sentence in the case of reﬂexives) in gender (2b).  (2) a.  Double-match.  Mr.  Jones was listening very hard.  He knew that Peter was playing some classical music to himself/him on the new piano.  b.  Single-match.  Susan was listening very hard.  She knew that Peter was playing some classical music to himself/her on the new piano.  While participants were hearing the sentences, a visual display with four pictures was presented.  Two pictures depicted the two animate characters mentioned in the sentences.  one depicted an inanimate object that was also mentioned in the second sentence, and the fourth picture depicted a distractor inanimate object not mentioned in the sentences.  Looking times for the pictures were measured during the processing window of the anaphoric expression.  Both children and adults were temporarily distracted by the competitor antecedent in the double match condition in the case of pronouns shown by longer looking times to the reference of the competing antecedent in the double than in the single match condition, but the effect was signiﬁcantly higher in children.  During the interpretation of reﬂexives, only children looked signiﬁcantly longer at the competing antecedent in the double than in the single match condition (but see Clackson & Heyer, 2014).  This suggests that if a noun phrase is not a potential antecedent based on binding principles, but is supported by other cues (gender match and recency/primacy in this case), it distracts children by creating competition between antecedents supported by different cues in the case of both pronouns and reﬂexives.  These results show that although the ﬁnal interpretation of reﬂexives is adultlike in children, their processing is different when binding principles and discourse prominence provide conﬂicting cues.  Taken together, the above results show that multiple potential antecedents have additional processing costs both in children and in adults, but it is not yet clear what mechanism plays a role in selecting the correct one and why young children have more difﬁculties than adults.  Earlier studies emphasized the contribution of a pragmatic principle (Chien & Wexler, 1990.  Grodzinsky & Reinhart, 1993) or working memory factors (Grodzinsky & Reinhart, 1993.  Montgomery & Evans, 2009), while Clackson et al.  (2011) attributed an important role to cognitive control.  Chien and Wexler (1990) argue that a pragmatic principle (Principle P) is necessary for ruling out coreference between the pronoun and an NP in its local domain, and thus for identifying the antecedent of a pronoun.  They claim that while syntactic principles like Principle A and B are innate, pragmatic principles have to be learned during the course of development.  This proposal is in line with the model of syntactic acquisition in the principles and parameters theory (Guasti, 2002).  Grodzinsky and Reinhart (1993) also argue that the operation of, in their case, an innate-pragmatic principle, which they call Rule I, is necessary for ruling out inappropriate coreference in the case of pronouns.  They emphasize the importance of general processing abilities, more speciﬁcally of working memory, in the use of the pragmatic principle.  Both theories were primarily formulated to account for developmental differences between the interpretation of pronouns and reﬂexives, but their conclusions are considered to be true for anaphor interpretation in general.  Recent studies investigating the role of working memory with targeted working memory (Montgomery & Evans, 2009) and cognitive control (Clackson et al. , 2011.  Clackson & Heyer, 2014) tests also support the role of these abilities in anaphor interpretation.  In the following section, we review studies that investigated the relationship between working memory and sentence comprehension in SLI, including Montgomery and Evans’s (2009) study, which aimed to test the relationship speciﬁcally with sentences with anaphors.  Before discussing the association with cognitive control, we would like to make some clariﬁcations about the use of the concept and its relationship with working memory in the Working Memory, Executive Functions, and Cognitive Control Section.  SENTENCE COMPREHENSION AND WORKING MEMORY IN SLI.  The importance of working memory, that is, our ability to store and manipulate information simultaneously, in sentence comprehension has been widely documented in adults (Just & Carpenter, 1992.  Miyake, Carpenter, & Just, 1994.  Waters & Caplan, 1996).  Although the limitations of working memory, especially in the verbal domain, are among the proposed core deﬁcits in children with SLI (e. g. , Archibald & Gathercole, 2006.  Ellis Weismer, Evans, & Hesketh, 1999.  Gathercole & Baddeley, 1990.  Hesketh & Conti-Ramsden, 2013.  Marton, Kelmenson, & Pinkhasova, 2007.  Marton & Schwartz, 2003), we found only a limited number of studies speciﬁcally investigating the relationship between sentence comprehension and working memory in language impairment.  Montgomery (1995, 2004) tested the relationship between phonological working memory measured by a nonword repetition task and sentence comprehension in 8. 2 (1995) and 8. 9 (2004) aged children with SLI and in their TD peers.  Sentence comprehension was tested with auditory sentences in a picture selection task.  A positive correlation was found between nonword repetition and sentence comprehension performance in the whole group of children in Montgomery (1995), but there was no signiﬁcant correlation between the two measures in Montgomery (2004).  More relevant to our study, Montgomery and Evans (2009) investigated the role of working memory in the comprehension of complex sentences with a passive structure, and with reﬂexives and with pronouns. 