INTRODUCTION.  Issues of how to analyze gender and sexual identities in interaction have been largely already discussed, in particular in the field of Conversation Analysis (CA) (Schegloff 1997, 1998.  Wetherell 1998.  Kitzinger 2000.  Speer and Stokoe 2011).  Some of the criticism addressed by conversation analysts is that much of the research on the relationships between language, gender, and sexuality lies in understanding speakers and talk as predetermined by abstract discourses ‘from above’ or ‘beyond’ talk (Speer and Stokoe 2011.  7).  Schegloff (1997) claims that gender has to be demonstrably relevant to the participants – instead of being (a priori and exogenously) imposed by analysts – in order to be used as an analytical social category in social interaction.  The author notes, for instance, that it is not enough to justify referring to someone as a ‘woman’ just because she is, in fact, a woman – because she is, by the same token, a Californian, Jewish, a mediator, a former weaver, my wife, and many other things.  (Schegloff 1997. CA methodological criteria on what counts as analytical categories, and its reluctance to bring wider (or macro) social issues2 – such as power, heteronormativity, and oppression – aprioristically into the analysis, have not gone without criticism (e. g.  Wetherell 1998).  In response to the criticism of CA’s conceptualization of what actually is relevant to the participants or what constitutes participants’ orientation to gender (e. g.  Wetherell 1998.  Ehrlich 2002), a number of scholars have demonstrated how powerful the conversational analytical lenses might be at grasping gender and sexual identities in action (e. g.  Ehrlich 2002.  Kitzinger 2005, 2007.  Speer and Stokoe 2011.  Ostermann and Kitzinger 2012).  As Weatherall (2002.  768) points out, [b]eing limited, as an analyst, to the overtly displayed concerns of the participants is not to say that gender is not omni-relevant.  What it does mean is that it is incumbent on the researcher to show how and that gender as omnirelevant is produced and oriented to.  Moreover, once analysts have demonstrated and described the specific and practical ways of how gender is actualized in interaction, this might also allow them to show how such practices could possibly be changed (Ostermann and Kitzinger 2012).  Aligned with the perspective taken by other studies interested in unveiling how participants orient to gender and sexuality in talk and how larger social constructs come into being in social interaction, the current study also takes up Garfinkel’s ethnomethodological claim (1967) that it is part of the analysts’ task to actually show how interactants’ production of their everyday activities is informed by certain categorizations and how the interactants demonstrate their oriention to them (Stokoe 2000, 2006.  Stokoe and Smithson 2001.  Stokoe and Weatherall 2002.  Speer and Stokoe 2011).  In other words, the analysis and discussion presented in this paper assume an understanding that interactants are continuously attributing meaning to and demonstrating their understanding of interactions, the world around them and what is happening here and now.  Thus, a close analysis of naturally occurring interactions is taken here as central to explaining the methods and everyday practices that participants use in order to produce such worlds (Garfinkel 1967.  Speer and Stokoe 2011).  Such perspective also reflects how this paper connects with the special theme of this issue.  The perspective assumed here is not one of North and South, West and non-West, developed and developing (or even underdeveloped), First and Third World, center and periphery, or the macro and micro.  Instead, it assumes a tentatively less dichotomous perspective that proposes to simply shift our point of departure by first looking at the ‘margins’ (Milani 2014), and only then investigating how the margins – perhaps unavoidably – relate (or not) to what has been taken to be the ‘metropole’.  What I propose, in fact, is not new.  to (firstly) look at and (only later) theorize from language where language is actually used.  to look at and theorize from the actual sites where people are interacting in the world to carry out their everyday affairs, investigating how they orient (or not) to certain categories and how they make sense of the world while doing so. 3 In this sense, Conversation Analysis and categorization analysis serve as empowering analytical lenses to investigate participants’ own understandings and categorizations of gender and sexuality.  In order to frame the analysis of this paper within the larger theme of the Special Issue, I take here Comaroff and Comaroff’s invitation (2012a.  1), originally formulated as ‘What if we posit that, in the present moment, it is the global south that affords privileged insight into the workings of the world at large. ’ (emphasis added), and modify it slightly so as to propose that ‘What if we posit that [.  .  . ] it is the micro level of everyday interactions that affords privileged insight into the workings of the world at large’.  This work, thus, investigates the micro level of talk-in-interaction itself in the production and naturalization of understandings of gender and sexuality.  By analyzing language as it is used by people when conducting their everyday affairs, the study looks at how ‘heteronormativity’ (Warner 1991) or ‘compulsory heterosexuality’ (Rich 1980.  Butler 1990) are actualized in naturalistic data, and how intersubjectivity (understood here as the participants’ mutual understandings), in particular when at stake, might reveal ‘heteronormativity in action’, to borrow Kitzinger’s (2005) words.  By relying on such an analytical perspective, the paper also aims to call into question the traditional dichotomy of the micro and macro perspectives, demonstrating how the interactional moment, as a condensed historicity of participants’ own understandings and categorizations of gender and sexuality, seems to respond to a wider sociocultural repertoire which makes what is local simultaneously translocal.  <Middle> SITUATING THE SETTING, DATA, AND METHODS.  Helplines, the interactional context of interest here, are dedicated telephonebased services (delivered by both the private and public sector) that provide some type of assistance, guidance and/or simply information on a range of topics or concerns, such as legal, medical, emotional, among others (Baker, Emmison and Firth 2005).  An example of a helpline would be a phone number made available by a software company to help customers with troubleshooting.  Within the context of helplines, it is by means of talk-in-interaction that callers and call takers conduct their main business, i. e.  to request for and receive some type of help – whose nature, of course, can vary.  In addition, it is by means of talk-in-interaction that specific meanings are negotiated, and the participants’ reasoning, assumptions and beliefs are rendered visible.  The wider study from which this investigation derives comprises 308 audio recorded and fully transcribed, naturally occurring phone-call interactions directed to a Brazilian governmental health helpline, Centro de Informac~oes sobre Saude (also referred to here as CIS). 4 That is a toll free number, created by the Brazilian Ministry of Health to provide citizens with health information and referrals.  Most users of the helpline are working-class citizens with low educational background whose access to health information (including internet access) is limited.  The interactions analyzed for the larger investigation from which this study derives, and whose main purpose was to investigate morality in action in interactions in women’s public health services in Brazil, were limited to those initiated by a citizen, and then only those in which the caller selected ‘women’s health’ in the initial menu, and further selected one of the following topics in the submenu.  HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases, cancer or contraception.  As is the case for most telephone services in Brazil nowadays, all CIS calls are automatically recorded by the management for quality control, with callers being informed of the recording at the start of every call by means of an automated message.  It is important to register, however, that all calls are anonymous.  At no instance in the interactions are callers asked to reveal their names.  Thus, in order to ensure the highest possible ethical care while simultaneously abiding by the institutional demand to not interfere with their current practices at the time, written permission for participation in the study was requested only from the call takers. 5 Those who chose not to take part in the study had their wish respected and, thus, the institutional recordings of their calls were not analyzed.  In addition, any mention of proper names that might indicate who the participants are, including names of cities, streets, and institutions, were replaced by fictitious ones.  The analysis presented here focusses on the final phase of the phone calls.  more specifically, the analysis is circumscribed to the phase when the institutional representative (call taker or CT) applies a survey that requests demographic information from the caller (C).  This survey was introduced in 2010 by the Ministry of Health as part of the service provided by the helpline, CIS.  The introduction of surveys at the end of the calls was motivated by the government’s initiative to gather statistics about the helpline callers in order to propose actions more closely tailored to their profiles, including the need to serve LGBTT users more adequately in the public health system.  Out of the corpus of 308 recorded phone calls analyzed in the larger study, only 31 contained the recording of the survey.  That survey comprised 20 questions, ordered in a pre-arranged way.  Among the information requested about the caller were age, gender, sexual orientation, and educational level.  Despite some initial neglect of the survey recordings in the phone calls, a closer look at the data revealed that speakers interactionally demonstrated problems when dealing with one specific question.  the one about the caller’s sexual orientation.  It is the interactional trajectory of the sequence surrounding such a question that this paper investigates.  Following the tradition of other conversation analytical studies (Kitzinger 2000.  Paoletti 2002.  Speer 2005.  Wilkinson and Kitzinger 2014.  Lindstr€om, N€aslund and Rubertsson 2015), in order to carry out such investigation, I combine Conversation Analysis (CA) (Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson 1974) with categorization analysis (Sacks 1992).  Moreover, at some points in the analysis I also rely on some ethnographic notes about the call center and its workings.  SEXUAL ORIENTATION AS INTERACTIONALLY DELICATE.  The sequence involving the actions of requesting and providing information about the caller’s sexual orientation reveals itself as interactionally ‘delicate’ (Silverman and Per€akyl€a 1990.  Per€akyl€a 1995) by the participants’ orientation to it.  The first evidence for such a claim is that such a question is deliberately moved by the CTs from its middle position in the survey list – i. e.  allocated by the Ministry of Health as the 10th out of 20 questions – to be asked as the very last, as Figure 1 below illustrates.  This change, as reported by the call takers in informal conversations with me, is a way to maximize the information obtained by means of the survey, since a number of callers hang up after being asked about their sexuality.  Thus, according to the call takers, by requesting that information as the last question in the survey, if the call is abruptly terminated, the responses to the rest of the survey could still have been obtained.  Secondly, as an attempt to deal with the complexity of the question about ‘sexual orientation’, call takers make use of alternative ways of designing the format of the request.  The original structure of the question posed by the Ministry of Health – an open Wh-question (What is your sexual orientation. ) – is actually informally modified and produced in three other formats, as represented in Figure 2.  1.  polar (yes/no) questions (Heritage and Raymond 2012).  2.  alternative questions (Bolinger 1978).  or 3.  in-progress ‘list construction’ (Jefferson 1991).  Call takers reported doing this in order to facilitate the interaction.  According to them, responding ‘yes’ or ‘no’ (to a yes-no question) – instead of having to produce an answer to an open question – should make it ‘easier’ or simpler for the callers to respond.  Because the polar yes-no question was by far the most frequent format used by the call takers (28 out of the 31 occurrences), it is on sequences involving that specific format that this paper concentrates.  The single occurrence of the inprogress list construction and its interactional consequences are discussed elsewhere (Ostermann in preparation). What follows are some examples of how the survey open question about sexual orientation is actualized in interactions in its different formats. 6 Polar (yes/no) questions.  (1) Call taker.  voc^e e heterossexua. l.  are you heterose. xual.  (2) Call taker.  . h e com relac~ao a sua opc~a- a sua orientac~ao sexual voc^e e heterossexu↑a. l . h and in relation to your sexual opt- to your sexual orientation are you heterosexu↑a. l Alternative questions.  (3) Call taker.  e.  orientac~ao sexual voc^e se considera . h heterossexual ou homossexual uh.  sexual orientation do you consider yourself . h heterosexual or homosexual In-progress list construction.  (4) Call taker.  e.  orientac~ao sexual voc^e se considera . h heterossexua. . l, homossexua. . l, uh.  sexual orientation do you consider yourself . h heterose. . xual, homose. . xual, Such deliberate transformation, in particular, the most frequently used format in the data set (i. e.  yes-no questions), besides creating a number of interactional problems for the participants in terms of intersubjectivity, as discussed elsewhere (Ostermann in preparation), also reveals the workings of heteronormativity (or of ‘heteronormativity in action’.  Kitzinger 2005), as explored in this paper.  Finally, the interactional delicacy surrounding the sequence that involves the request and provision of information about the callers’ sexual orientation becomes noticeable also through ‘perturbations’ (Silverman and Per€akyl€a 1990) in the participants’ talk – i. e.  disturbances in their speech, such as pauses, hesitations, repairs and laughter.  A NEUTRAL QUESTION.  A PRESUPPOSED HETEROSEXUAL WORLD.  Interactional studies of naturally occurring ordinary and institutional interactions have demonstrated that questions may perform a number of different actions besides that of requesting information (Freed and Ehrlich 2010.  Hayano 2013).  Other actions performed by questions might include inviting, challenging, requesting accounts and initiating repair, among others (Hayano 2013).  However, questions do even more.  They also communicate the questioner’s beliefs, reasoning and expectations.  questions presuppose (Heritage 2010).  When deliberately transforming an originally open question about sexuality (‘What is your sexual orientation. ’) into a yes/no interrogative (‘Are you heterosexual. ’) or an alternative question (‘Are you heterosexual or homosexual. ’) – or any combinations of the two formats – call takers communicate some of their beliefs and assumptions about the callers and the world.  The major format used by the call takers (Y-N questions) reveals itself as problematic for being shaped in a non-neutral format and creating presuppositions about the caller.  The alternative question-format (‘Are you heterosexual or homosexual. ’), used alone on only two occasions, creates a binary world of sexual orientation, thus limiting the choices one might have.  An answer that does not conform to any of the choices offered in the first-pair part of the adjacency pair will tend to demand more interactional work from the participants and be ‘dispreferred’ (Lee 2013.  Pomerantz and Heritage 2013).  Another presupposition operates in polar (yes/no) interrogatives (Heritage 2010.  Raymond 2010.  Ostermann and Jaeger 2012).  As Heritage (2010.  51) explains, ‘the conversation analytic term preference is used to describe the bias or tilt of questions that are designed for, favor, or suggestanexpectation ofananswer ofaparticular type. ’ In that sense, thegrammaticaldesign of the interrogative ‘Are you heterosexual. ’ favors a ‘yes’ answer (see also Raymond 2010).  By transforming an originally open question (‘What is your sexual orientation. ’) into a yes-preferred question (‘Are you heterosexual. ’ or the alternative ‘Are you heterosexual or not. ’), the call taker communicates preference of some kind.  a yes agreement.  Beyond that, she/he also selects a specificsexualorientation(oraspecificcategory)asadefault,‘morefavorable’one, thus revealing ‘heteronormativity’ (Warner1991)–mostcommonlydiscussed as a macro level concept – in operation at the micro level of everyday interactions.  The data show that when the caller responds affirmatively to the first production of a yes-preferred question, her answer is not problematized and the interaction evolves to its closing, as shown in Extract 1.  Extract 1 [Disk040909ReginaAIDS] 234 Call taker.  hhh a. . h a senhora se considera heterossexual 235 hhh u. . h do you consider yourself heterosexual 236 Caller.  ↑s. i. . . m.  237 ↑y. e. . . s.  238 Call taker.  oquei senhora (. ) muito obrigado por colabo↑ra (. ) o 239 ministerio da saude agradece a sua ligac~ao ligue sempre que 240 for necessa. rio . hh tenha um ↑bom ↓di. a 241 okay mam (. ) thank you very much for colla↑borating (. ) the 242 ministry of health thanks you for your call call whenever 243 necessary . hh have a ↑great ↓da. y 244 Call taker.  bom dia 245 have a good day After receiving a type-conforming as well as a preference-conforming answer by the caller (i. e.  ‘yes’), the call taker immediately moves to the closing of the interaction (lines 238–240 / 241–243).  Notice that this is so despite the markedness with which such a yes-preferred answer is produced in Excerpt 1 (lines 236 / 237) – a one syllable agreement marked not only with stretched sounds but also with a rising intonation (↑y. e. . . s. ).  Conversely, in all but six cases inwhich the caller provides a no as a response, her answer ismetwith some type of ‘problematization’ by the CT. Repair sequences are initiated, and, as a consequence, the sequence gets extended over a number of turns in talk until its closing.  However, another fact calls attention to the data set being analyzed.  Despite the preferred yes-answer in the design of the question, and taking into consideration that we live in a world largely defined as heterosexual (Warner 1991), it might be somewhat intriguing that out of 28 survey respondents replying to Y-N questions, only six categorized themselves as being heterosexual.  It is to those interactions that the next section in this paper turns.  CO-CONSTRUCTING A HETEROSEXUAL WORLD.  The sequence involving the request and provision of information about the caller’s sexual orientation in which the caller answers negatively to being heterosexual, in addition to revealing large confusion about what heterosexual means, opens up trajectories of interaction that activate categorizations and make accessible demonstrably naturalized understandings about gender and sexuality.  This section of the analysis, thus, investigates such interactional trajectories and, in doing so, reveals the operation of heteronormativity and compulsory heterosexuality (Rich 1980) at the very micro, social level of human interaction.  The excerpts described below were selected on the basis of the recurrence of the phenomenon they represent in the larger corpus.  Extract 2 [DISK080909HelenaCAN] 260 Call taker.  ce. . rto (. ) . h e.  po- en↓t~ao senhora- (. ) a senhora se considera 261 heteressexu↑al 262 oka. . y (. ) . h ah.  you so- ↓okay mam- (. ) do you consider yourself 263 heterosexu↑al 264 (1. 4) 265 Caller.  n~a. o267 (0. 6) 268 Call taker.  heterossexual senhora e a pessoa que tem afinidade pelo sexo 269 o↑posto >ou seja a mulher ter afinidade por um homem< 270 heterosexual mam is a person who has affinity with the 271 opposite ↑sex.  >in other words< the woman who has affinity 272 with a ↑man.  273 Caller.  a.  ent~ao sim (hh) eu n~ao entendi muito bem 274 oh.  then yes (hh) I hadn’t understood it very well276 Call taker.  oque. i senhora ent~ao o ministerio da saude agra↑dece a sua 277 ligac~ao ligue sempre que for necessario, e tenha um ↑bom dia.  278 oka. y mam then the ministry of health thanks for your call.  call 279 whenever necessary, and have a ↑good day.  In Extract 2, after receiving a no (lines 265 / 266) to her yes-preferred question (260–261 / 262–263) – which is delivered with a number of perturbations (stretches, hesitations, inbreaths) – in her next turn, the CT problematizes such an answer.  Such problematization is done by means of a repair initiation (Schegloff 1992), which consists of an unrequested explanation of what heterosexual means – ‘a person who has affinity with the opposite ↑sex’ (lines 268–269 / 270–272).  Such explanation is further modified by the CT to be more recipient-designed, i. e.  by replacing ‘a person’ with ‘a woman’ and ‘opposite sex’ with ‘a man’.  In other words, the call taker designs her further explanation of ‘heterosexual’ to be a type of relationship that is (potentially) more adjusted to that specific caller – an adult female.  The repair initiation implemented by the CT in lines 268–269 and 270–272 reveals at least two assumptions at this point.  (1) that the caller is heterosexual and (2) that by answering negatively (i. e.  that she is not heterosexual) the caller either (2a) has not understood the CT’s question or (2b) does not understand what heterosexual means.  As revealed in the caller’s next turn (lines 273 / 274), marked with a change of state token (‘oh. ’) and the delivered ‘online’ realization of how her sexual orientation is named (‘then yes (hh) I hadn’t understood it very well’, in lines 273 / 274), assumptions (1) and (2b) are interactionally revealed to be actually the case.  Another – and perhaps even stronger – instance of presupposed heterosexuality, as well as of misunderstanding what heterosexual means, takes place in Extract 3.  The question about the caller’s sexual orientation in Extract 3 is designed in a slightly different way from the one in Extract 2.  The yes-preferred question (‘and are you heterose. xual’, in lines 338 / 340) is immediately revised into a format that supposedly explains what heterosexual means (‘that is are you attracted to the opposite ↑sex’, in lines 338–339 / 340–341) and again into another question that further elaborates the explanation (‘are you a[ttracted] to me. n. ’, lines 339 and 344 / 341 and 345).  However, before the third question reaches a possible transition point, the caller provides, in overlap with the CT, a negation (‘[no. ]’, lines 342 / 343), which is repeated in lines 347 and 348 – possibly to resolve possible problems of hearing caused by the earlier overlap.  Interestingly, at this point the CT challenges (Levinson 2013) the caller’s negative answer, by repeating the caller’s ‘no’ with rising intonation (‘no. . ’, lines 350 / 351), to which the caller answers once again with a negation (lines 353 / 354).  Demonstrating that she is not yet satisfied with the caller’s third negation, in lines 356–357 and 358–359, the CT further elaborates her question in an alternative format that could be represented as.  Are you A and not B, or are you B. .  At this point, the caller simply negates all the possibilities presented so far.  However, once again evidencing what seems to be a pursuit of a ‘yes-I-am-heterosexual’ answer, the CT presents the question in yet another format (‘. h are you attracted to ↑me. n’, lines 363 / 364).  At this point we have access to yet another disclosure of misunderstanding when the caller replies that she is attracted only to her husband.  Thus, what we see happening in this interaction, just as in the previous one, is an assumption by the CT that the caller.  (1) is heterosexual and that (2) she does not reply affirmatively because she does not understand the word heterosexual nor any of the explanations provided by the CT – assumptions that are again revealed to be congruent.  Interestingly, however, and differently from Extract 2, in Excerpt 3 we also have access to an understanding and belief of the caller herself which might represent female sexuality at a more general level.  that her sexual desire is not directed towards all or any men, but only to her husband.  In terms of categorizations, the caller makes reference to a relational pair of husband-wife in which the wife has limited rights to sexual attraction – only to her husband – which, in its turn, also points to a certain understanding of female sexuality.  that of fidelity or even of chastity.  Extract 4, below, reveals another made-explicit categorization by the caller about female sexuality.  This interaction shows in so many words the caller’s problem with understanding the CT’s question – or more specifically, with what heterosexual means – as she explicitly initiates repair of the trouble source question with another question, in ‘what do you mea. n. ’ (lines 260 and 261).  After taking more turns to repair that understanding and others (i. e.  about what the CT means by preference), in lines 275 and 276 the CT and caller finally seem to reach shared understanding with regards to the information being requested.  This moment comes, however, with a meaningful categorization by the caller.  that because of being a woman, her sexual preference has to be for men.  Another interesting point here is the design of her answer – a response that does more than the simple provision of the information requested (for a discussion on answers that resist questions and on answers that do other (or more) than answering, see Stivers and Hayashi 2010.  Walker, Drew and Local 2011.  Couper-Kuhlen 2014).  The caller uses the discourse marker ne (roughly translated as ‘of course’ here) in the second position to the question, showing thus the ‘obviousness’ of what has been asked, in ‘[I’m] a woman of course.  it has to be for men (. ) °(hh)°’.  On what concerns how the answer is produced, it happens both (1) in overlap with the previous question and (2) with an account (i. e.  that she is a woman) which is positioned before the actual provision of the requested information (i. e.  that she is attracted to men).  Such features in the design of her answer point to the relevance of the categorization in process taking place here.  that of compulsory heterosexuality, of biological sex determining her sexual desire for males (Rich 1980.  Butler 1990).  Possibly, it is Extract 5, below, that most emblematically represents all of the complexities involved in the sequences of the helpline survey question about the caller’s sexual orientation.  This interaction presents again a series of repair sequences. 