INTRODUCTION.  In the course of typical language development children produce relative clauses as early as around three years of age (Crain, McKee & Emiliani, .  Diessel & Tomasello, .  Jisa & Kern, .  Limber, ).  However, research suggests that across languages their comprehension of the same structures does not emerge until two to three years later (de Villiers, Tager-Flusberg, Hakkuta & Cohen, .  Goodluck & Tavakolian, .  Håkansson & Hansson, .  Sheldon, ).  The majority of the comprehension studies cited here use a toy manipulation paradigm where the child uses toys to act out a spoken sentence, and although significant variation is reported within their results, studies that compare production and comprehension directly (using a number of methodologies) (e. g.  Håkansson & Hansson, ) have also reported superior production skills.  This pattern of development for complex clauses contrasts with the usual finding that comprehension precedes production (Leonard, ), raising questions about how comprehension of these structures is assessed.  In everyday discourse, comprehension can often be achieved even if a heard sentence is only partially processed, by using context and prior knowledge to infer meaning.  Formal tests of syntactic knowledge, however, typically are devised to reduce or even abolish use of context, forcing the listener to process the incoming sentence completely.  Instruments have been devised to assess language comprehension by using a multiple-choice format that in effect forces the listener to form a semantic representation that relies on the syntactic structure to assign thematic roles to all the content words in a sentence.  Clinical instruments typically use a one in four picture layout (one picture representing the target structure and the other three considered distractors) to reduce the probability of choosing the correct item by chance.  In addition, this layout reduces the number of exemplars required to test each item effectively, thereby avoiding an assessment of unreasonable length.  Using this approach, it is possible to devise test items that can only be interpreted by those with a deep knowledge of the construction under test.  At the same time, however, the multiple-choice format has the drawback that it introduces elements into the task that may lead to failure for reasons other than lack of linguistic competence.  Consider the items shown in Figures a, b, and c.  If a child is able to select the correct response in a set of items such as these, this is good evidence that they are able to analyze the relative clause construction to assign thematic roles to the lexical items in the sentence.  If, however, they fail, this could be due to non-linguistic factors, such as difficulty holding the sentence in memory while comparing the four pictured items, which are perceptually as well as linguistically confusing.  The presence of three distractors adds a linguistic as well as cognitive load to the task.  Linguistically, not only is the child required to map the semantic roles on to the syntactic structure, but they must also rule out three competing alternative mappings.  The ability to rule out competing structures is likely to be influenced by other executive functions such as selective attention and inhibition.  Because of these concerns, it may be unwise to rely solely on this type of multiple-choice test to assess knowledge of complex syntax.  Other approaches to assessment are possible, but each will have its own biases and complexities.  For instance, we could use the method employed in most of the comprehension studies cited above, in which the task is to act out a spoken sentence.  However, act-out tasks have also been criticized on the basis that they may underestimate children’s knowledge due to a competing acting bias (McDaniel & McKee, ), i. e.  children’s desire to play with the toys rather than follow the instructions they hear.  In addition, it has been suggested that an act-out methodology unnecessarily complicates the child’s task and that many used experimentally have violated appropriate pragmatic conditions by not providing a set of referents from which a subset can be distinguished (Hamburger & Crain, ).  One assessment method that has been widely used in recent years to assess grammatical knowledge is sentence repetition.  Although at first glance this might seem to be a measure simply of the ability to repeat a string of words, a large body of research shows that this is not the case.  Immediate sentence repetition has been shown to be reflective of language behaviour in natural settings (Gallimore & Tharpe, ), and both immediate and delayed repetition have been found to discriminate effectively between second language learners across different proficiency levels (see review by Yan, Maeda, Lv & Ginther, ).  As far back as the late s, researchers such as Slobin and Welsh () and Clay () argued that if sentence length exceeds an individual’s short-term memory word span (the number of words they can repeat in a list), repetition will require a reliance on linguistic knowledge in long-term memory.  They argued that sentence repetition reflects an individual’s underlying grammatical competence, in that a person’s syntactic knowledge assists them in ‘chunking’ components of the sentence, which facilitates the recall process.  Therefore, sentences that exceed a child’s short-term memory span are likely to be processed for meaning when produced successfully (Naiman, .  Slobin & Welsh, .  Vinther, ).  More recently, Riches () suggested that the roles of short- and long-term memory are not length dependent, but that they work effectively together at all sentence lengths.  Researchers are now converging on the view that sentence repetition is not purely a task of reproducing a heard series of words, but that it is supported by conceptual, lexical, and syntactic representations in long-term memory (Brown & Hulme, .  Hulme, Maughan & Brown .  Klem, Melby-Lervag, Hagtvet, Lyster, Gustafsson & Hulme, .  Potter & Lombardi, , .  Schweickert, ), as well as by phonological short-term memory processes (Alloway & Gathercole, .  Hanten & Martin, .  McCarthy & Warrington, .  Rummer & Engelkamp ).  In addition, a number of researchers have highlighted the link between sentence repetition and syntactic competence in children.  Using immediate recall of subject and object relative clauses, Kidd, Brandt, Lieven, and Tomasello () found that manipulating complexity while maintaining sentence length resulted in children making a greater number of sentence repetition errors.  This was also the case in research carried out by Frizelle and Fletcher (), using the full range of relative clause types.  while length remained constant, children found it increasingly difficult to immediately recall sentences as the complexity of the structure increased.  The implication here is that these difficulties cannot be explained by differences in short-term phonological memory but by the underlying syntactic competence or representations in long-term memory.  The relationship between syntactic competence and sentence repetition ability is further reinforced in a recent study by Polišenská, Chiat, and Roy ().  These authors investigated how different types of long-term linguistic knowledge contribute to children’s immediate recall ability.  They manipulated seven different linguistic conditions ranging from sequences of non-words to full grammatical sentences to evaluate how each condition affected children’s span.  They found that children’s morphosyntactic knowledge played the largest role in children’s immediate recall capacity.  children obtained a mean span of over · words longer for grammatical than ungrammatical sentences, compared to an increased span of just · for real words vs.  non-words and less than  for sentences that were either semantically plausible or not.  Other researchers have directly compared children’s performance on sentence repetition tasks to their spontaneous use of grammar.  Geers and Moog () reported a strong correlation between the average immediate sentence repetition error scores (from children aged four to fifteen years) and those derived from Developmental Sentence Scoring (DSS) (Lee, ) – a measure of grammatical complexity in spontaneous language use.  In addition, McDade, Simpson, and Lamb () reported a very strong correlation between the performance of four-year-old children on a sentence repetition task (with a -second time lapse following each sentence) and their DSS performance.  The research we have cited, coupled with the current thinking on the underlying mechanisms involved in sentence repetition, would lead us to conclude that sentence repetition is a reliable measure of children’s grammatical knowledge.  However, few studies have directly compared children’s sentence repetition performance with their understanding of grammatical structures.  The question that we consider here is how far there is agreement between sentence repetition and multiple-choice comprehension measures of competence with a type of complex sentence, relative clause constructions.  There are three aspects to this question.  .  We can ask whether one task is generally easier than the other.  On the one hand, we might expect a comprehension task to be easier because it does not require the child to engage language production systems, and because the presence of pictures should ease the memory load on the child, as the pictures provide a permanent concrete representation of the lexical items in the sentence.  On the other hand, a repetition task does not necessitate that the sentence be assigned a semantic interpretation.  Interestingly, when McDade et al.  () investigated children’s sentence recall ability as a function of sentence comprehension, they found that children could repeat sentences that they did not understand.  In their study, six children (aged . 