INTRODUCTION.  The acquisition of heritage languages, i. e.  minority languages acquired in a migration context, has been a matter of debate in recent literature.  Heritage speakers (HSs) acquire two (or more) languages in childhood and thus the acquisition of a heritage language (HL) is an instance of bilingual acquisition.  HSs are either simultaneous bilinguals, if they are exposed to the minority and the majority language from birth, or successive bilinguals, if contact with the majority language occurs after extensive exposure to the family (heritage) language.  In either case, the age of onset of acquisition (AOA) of the HL is similar to monolinguals.  Nonetheless, a HL is defined by becoming a non-dominant language when the speakers start schooling and the amount of input and continued language use radically decreases for the HL (Rothman, ).  As a result, HSs’ linguistic performance became a fertile ground of inquiry, namely allowing researchers to discuss to what extent the steady state of linguistic knowledge ultimately attained by those speakers corresponds to what is attained by monolingual speakers (see the discussion in Montrul, .  Rothman, ).  When divergence between monolingual and HL acquisition is identified, different explanations have been put forward, namely incomplete development or language attrition (Montrul, .  Polinsky, ), or explanations relating to the quality of the input (Pascual y Cabo & Rothman, .  Pires & Rothman, ).  Other studies highlight the nature of the linguistic property under evaluation, with later-acquired structures showing a more deficient acquisition than early-acquired properties (Flores & Barbosa, .  Santos & Flores, ).  Later-acquired properties are expected to be acquired at an age (school age) in which the child gets reduced input from his/her HL, since the majority language is now the child’s dominant language.  It is true, in general, that children vary in the amount of exposure that they have to their ambient language(s).  This has been shown to be the case not only for children who grow up with two ambient languages, but also for L input in typical monolingual acquisition settings across families and across different language communities (Hart & Risley, .  Hoff, .  Hurtado, Marchman & Fernald, ).  Even innatism, which relativizes the role of input in grammatical development (e. g.  Wexler, ), presupposes a minimal amount of exposure to primary linguistic data in order to activate the language acquisition device.  There has to be a minimal threshold of exposure responsible for triggering acquisition.  Limited exposure below this supposed baseline may trigger comprehension and perception skills, but not productive ones, as seems to be the case with ‘overhearers’ (Au, Knightly, Jun & Oh, ).  It has indeed been shown that restricted input to one language in bilingual acquisition settings influences the development of lexical knowledge (Bialystok & Luk, .  Hoff & Naigles, .  Thordardottir, ), pronunciation (Kupisch, Barton, Klaschik, Lein, Stangen & van de Weijer, ) and morphosyntactic knowledge (Gathercole & Thomas, .  Rodina & Westergaard, .  Unsworth, Argyri, Cornips, Hulk, Sorace & Tsimpli, ).  However, more studies are needed in order to determine to what extent the quantity of input may limit the acquisition of different areas of grammar.  Many studies showing input effects in bilingual acquisition focus on early successive bilinguals, and measure the effects of length of exposure to the target language, which interacts with the age of onset (see discussion in Unsworth, ).  In this paper, and by studying the acquisition of a HL, we intend to evaluate the effects of the amount of input, in an acquisition setting in which the age of onset is similar to that of monolinguals.  In this case, we will evaluate the quantity of input through indirect measures focused on children’s families, namely considering households with first- or second-generation parents and the existence of older siblings.  Particularly, we evaluate the effect of the amount of input in the acquisition of mood selection in complement clauses, a matter of semantics that interacts with the lexicon (lexical semantics of the matrix verb) and syntax (of complement clauses).  The study is based on European Portuguese (EP) acquired as a HL by children and adolescent speakers whose dominant language is German.  Most HL studies test adult HSs and therefore cannot distinguish effects of acquisition from effects of subsequent language attrition.  In this study, we test individuals who are still acquiring the property at stake.  Since use of the subjunctive mood has been shown to stabilize late, we take into account a large age span (six–sixteen years of age at the moment of testing) and adopt a cross-sectional approach, which will allow us to infer a scale of acquisition.  HSs’ results will be compared to previous results from a study on monolingual acquisition of the EP subjunctive (Jesus, ), in terms of both the scale and the rate of acquisition (we will therefore look at age).  When discussing age, we will confirm the relevancy of certain age thresholds identified in preceding work on language acquisition and language attrition.  Additionally, we tested eight adult HSs, who represent the ultimate attainment of HL acquisition.  INPUT EFFECTS AND THE ACQUISITION OF A HERITAGE LANGUAGE.  The effects of limited exposure to primary linguistic data have attracted recent attention in the study of bilingual acquisition (see, e. g.  Grüter & Paradis, ).  It has been suggested that restricted input to one language in bilingual acquisition settings may influence the development of different linguistic domains, e. g.  vocabulary size (Hoff, Core, Place, Rumiche, Senor & Parra, ) or morphosyntactic development (Austin, .  Blom, .  Gathercole, .  Gathercole & Thomas, .  Hoff et al. , .  Rodina & Westergaard, .  Schlyter, .  Suchtelen, .  Thomas, Williams, Jones, Davies & Binks, .  Unsworth, .  Unsworth et al. , .  among many others).  Schlyter () and Blom (), for instance, claim that bilingual children with very unbalanced language input develop a ‘weaker language’, displaying a slower rate of acquisition and structural transfer from the stronger language.  The stronger (ambient) language, on the other hand, seems to develop indistinguishably from that of monolingual children of the same language background.  As Meisel () points out, the hypothesis of a weaker language suggests that exposure since birth is a necessary but not sufficient condition for native-like language acquisition.  This seems to suggest that sufficient exposure to the primary linguistic data must happen at the appropriate age in order to be successful.  Several studies argue in favour of this idea.  Gathercole (), Gathercole and Thomas (), and Thomas et al.  (), for instance, show that the grammatical development of the minority language (Welsh, in their case) depends on the amount of exposure to this language at home and in school.  Several other studies, which include parental input as an extralinguistic variable, reach similar conclusions (e. 