I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Children’s acquisition of a verb lexicon forms a crucial interface between lexical and grammatical development (Pinker, .  Tomasello, ).  Verbs emerge later than nouns and occupy a smaller percentage of the initial lexicon (Bates et al. , .  Nelson, ).  Theoretically, verb acquisition may be more difficult than noun acquisition.  First, verbs involve conceptually more complicated notions (cf.  Gleitman, Cassidy, Nappa, Papafragou & Trueswell, ).  Whereas early common nouns denote entities, verbs denote event structures.  The meaning of verbs must encode relationships between the event and one or more noun phrases, also known as arguments.  Second, information in the input may provide more support for the acquisition of nouns relative to verbs.  Nouns in the input tend to be aligned with the physical objects they refer to, but verbs in the input may not be ‘time locked’ to the events they describe (Gleitman et al. , ).  Finally, “verb acquisition entails the learning of sentence frames” (Hadley, , p.  ).  To learn a verb meaning is to learn what noun phrase arguments are involved and how to arrange the verb and the arguments in the correct sequence (Pinker, .  Rice, ).  In this sense, the expansion of the verb lexicon provides a foundation for the development of simple, diverse sentences (Hadley, ).  Despite the importance of the verb lexicon to children’s language development, few studies have investigated how input affects children’s verb acquisition, and different research traditions have approached this question from distinct perspectives.  One research tradition in developmental and educational psychology has focused on understanding relationships between language input and individual differences in children’s rate of vocabulary development.  These input studies have established the associations between lexical quantity and lexical diversity in parent input and children’s general vocabulary development (Hoff & Naigles, .  Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer & Lyons, .  Huttenlocher, Waterfall, Vasilyeva, Vevea & Hedges, .  Rowe, ).  By the third year of life, lexical diversity in parent input has been shown to be a stronger predictor of children’s later vocabulary abilities than the sheer quantity of words in parent input (Rowe, ).  However, it is not clear whether such relationships hold specifically for the verb lexicon.  An alternative approach, influenced by psycholinguistic theories of language acquisition, has focused on the problem of how children learn verb meanings.  Theories of SYNTACTIC BOOTSTRAPPING have proposed that children are sensitive to verb-related syntactic and morphological cues, as these cues may serve to restrict verb meanings (Behrend, Harris & Cartwright, .  Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz & Gleitman, .  Naigles & Swensen, .  Yuan, Fisher & Snedeker, ).  However, little is known about the nature of these structural cues in naturalistic parent input and how parents vary in providing verb-related structural cues to their children.  The current study integrated these two research traditions by investigating the contribution of lexical quantity, lexical diversity, and verb-related structural cues in parent input to children’s subsequent expressive verb diversity.  The methods used in early input studies were primarily observational, with studies documenting correlations between features of naturalistic parent speech at Time  and children’s progress in language development between Time  and Time  (see Richards, , and Valian, , for comprehensive reviews).  More recent studies have associated parent input quantity and diversity with children’s language development (Hoff & Naigles, .  Huttenlocher et al. , , .  Rowe, ).  For example, Hoff and Naigles () studied sixty-three children who ranged in age from .  to . .  Time  parent input measures, specifically the number of total words, the number of different words, and mean length of utterance (MLU) in morphemes, were positively associated with children’s Time  vocabulary size obtained  weeks later.  Huttenlocher et al.  () reported converging results using a more sophisticated measure of children’s vocabulary GROWTH for twenty-two children from .  to . .  After controlling for child gender, Huttenlocher and colleagues found that approximately % of the variance in children’s rate of vocabulary acceleration was accounted for by the number of total words in the parent input.  Huttenlocher et al.  () adopted a similar longitudinal design, following the children from .  to . .  They found that both lexical and grammatical development were predicted by parent input quantity and diversity.  Additionally, Huttenlocher and colleagues revealed bi-directional influences with children’s language abilities accounting for later lexical measures of parent input.  This means that parents were not only exerting an influence on children’s later language development, but they were also adjusting their vocabulary input to their children’s levels of lexical development.  However, bi-directional influences were not apparent for the grammatical measures.  Most recently, Rowe () examined the contribution of parent input quantity and diversity to children’s vocabulary abilities one year later on a standardized measure of receptive vocabulary knowledge.  Different input properties emerged as better predictors of children’s vocabulary scores at different time points.  Parent input quantity at .  was most strongly related to children’s vocabulary scores at . , whereas input richness in both vocabulary diversity and sophistication at .  were stronger predictors of the subsequent vocabulary scores at . .  These findings underscore the importance of children’s exposure to diverse words in parent input during the third year of life.  Other input studies have been inspired by the SYNTACTIC BOOTSTRAPPING HYPOTHESIS, focusing on verb-related structural cues such as syntactic frames or morphological contexts that may support children’s verb acquisition (de Villiers, .  Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg, , ).  SYNTACTIC BOOTSTRAPPING refers to a process by which children restrict verb meanings according to the structural environments in which verbs occur (Gleitman, .  Landau & Gleitman, .  Naigles & Swensen, ).  Structural cues tend to correspond with verb semantics (Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg, , ).  For example, verbs involving agent-andpatient relations such as take and push usually occur in the transitive frame (Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg, ).  In experimental studies, children show sensitivity to structural cues such as the number of arguments attached to verbs or the morphological contexts of verbs (Behrend et al. , .  Fisher et al. , .  Yuan et al. , ).  The hypothesis is that the more different structural cues a verb co-occurs with, the earlier the verb will emerge in the lexicon.  Children may also use the verb in more different ways.  Guided by the syntactic bootstrapping hypothesis, Naigles and HoffGinsberg (, ) investigated fifty-seven parent–child dyads and collected naturalistic conversations at home.  The relationship between Time  parents’ verb use and Time  children’s verb production was examined, with a -week interval between Time  and Time .  The input sample at Time  was constructed by combining the fifty-seven parent speech samples into a single input corpus, with each parent providing the same number of utterances (i. e.  ).  The child speech sample at Time  was constructed by combining the fifty-seven child speech samples into a single child corpus, with each child contributing ninety utterances.  Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg examined the emergence of twenty-five commonly used verbs in parent input and child speech, analyzing the verb frequency and the verb-related syntactic frames in the pooled input sample. 