INTRODUCTION.  Much of the recent research in sociolinguistics has aimed to account for new phenomena in a globalised society to better understand processes of power and knowledge production (Blommaert 2010.  Coupland 2003.  Heller 2011).  Issues of translation have remained largely overlooked in ‘globalisationsensitive’ sociolinguistics research, despite the fact that decisions on what languages can, cannot or must be used, automatically entail consequences for translation (Meylaerts 2011) and ultimately for access to information, opportunities for knowledge production, and equity.  This article explores issues of multilingualism, language and translation policy in the field of transnational civil society.  I focus on one of the key actors in global governance, namely international non-governmental organisations (INGOs), as these organisations are important global workplaces in the new information- and knowledge-based economy (Castells 2000).  INGOs are organised differently from multinational companies and international governmental organisations, and are characterised by a humanist, nonprofit ethos (Rubenstein 2015).  Many large INGOs have recently undergone huge organizational changes, clustering into federations, associations and international networks, often with tasks from the traditionally Western-based headquarters being decentralised to the East and South (Bond 2015b).  Exploring language practices at INGOs is thus a way to capture some of the new phenomena brought about by globalisation.  By focusing on these issues at the international human rights NGO Amnesty International, this article aims to contribute to debates in a number of disciplines.  Firstly, in sociolinguistics and translation studies, the article offers an empirically-grounded account of language and translation policies in a global organisation.  It contributes to a growing body of research on language ideologies and multilingualism in NGOs and INGOs in the global political economy (Codo and Garrido 2010.  Kahn and Heller 2006.  Muehlmann and Duch^ene 2007.  Pujolar 2007) and on the sociolinguistics of globalisation (Blommaert 2010.  Blommaert, Collins and Slembrouck 2005.  Coupland 2003.  Heller 2011.  Maryns 2006).  Secondly, in international relations, development studies and political science, the article contributes to ongoing debates on the legitimacy of INGOs, the paradox between INGOs’ ethos and their often corporate management style, and INGOs’ efforts to bridge the divide between the global North and South (Demars and Dijkzeul 2015.  Lang 2014. 