I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Distinguishing between declaratives and interrogatives is an important ability for language users.  In English and many other languages, interrogatives generally involve syntactic structures and word order patterns that are different from declaratives.  For example, in English the canonical ordering in simple transitive declarative sentences is subject– verb–object (Slobin & Bever, ), as in Anna likes chocolate.  However, this ordering is disrupted in the associated polar interrogative, which inverts the subject and auxiliary verb, and inserts an utterance-initial do, since no auxiliary is present.  Thus, Anna likes chocolate becomes Does Anna like chocolate.  Moreover, in so-called wh-questions, a grammatical phrase that normally occurs in the declarative form is absent, and its content is queried by a wh-word – e. g.  who, what, where, how, etc.  – that occurs at the beginning of the sentence (Whatt does Anna like ti. ).  (The t stands for ‘trace’, and represents the structural location of the constituent that is related to the wh-word that shares its index – in this case, the direct object of like. ) Similar kinds of word order variations occur in many other (primarily Indo-European) languages (e. g.  Dryer, .  König & Siemund, ).  In many prominent theories of syntax acquisition, children learn basic word order (i. e.  the relative placement of subject nouns, object nouns, and verbs) and morphosyntax by bootstrapping off of declarative sentences (typically transitive declaratives) and typical linkages between syntactic positions in simple declarative sentences and elements of the scenes they describe (Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz & Gleitman, .  Pinker, ).  Thus, given the differences in word order and morphosyntactic patterning of declaratives and interrogatives, distinguishing the two sentence types is crucial for correctly learning the syntax of both types of utterances.  Learning mechanisms that analyzed declaratives and interrogatives as the same type would result in cascading errors in syntax acquisition, since fundamental misanalysis early on would result in incorrect representations in learning as subsequent utterances are processed (Pinker, ).  Since interrogatives constitute close to half of the utterances in young children’s input, in roughly equal proportions of polar interrogatives and wh-questions (% and %, respectively.  Newport, ), understanding when and how learners start to differentiate interrogatives and declaratives is important for understanding grammatical acquisition more broadly.  One way of distinguishing declaratives and interrogatives would simply be to use the word order properties just described as a basis for segregating sentence types.  Indeed, -month-olds appear to be able to use word order information in just this way (Geffen & Mintz, ).  However, there is reason to doubt that infants could use distributional information of this type as the INITIAL source of information for discriminating sentences. 