In natural languages, sentences are often underspeciﬁed, sometimes conveying more than they encode lexically.  The overall meaning of a sentence typically consists of multiple layers of meaning.  While some are literally encoded, others are simply inferences that the hearer must derive by reasoning from the context.  Consider (1), which presents a noncanonical French word order known as a c’estcleft.  To many French native speakers (NSs), (1) not only presupposes that there is a person who ate a sandwich and asserts that this person is Jean but also conveys exhaustivity.  the clefted constituent is interpreted as if under the scope of an exclusive (e. g. , “only”.  see [2]).  Listeners are thus justiﬁed in deriving the intended meaning that Jean, and no other individual in the relevant contextual domain, ate a sandwich.  (1) C’est Jean qui a mang´e un sandwich.  “It’s John who ate a sandwich. ” (2) Seul Jean a mang´e un sandwich.  “Only John ate a sandwich. ” One important difference between (1) and (2) is that nonliteral meanings can be suspended or canceled (Levinson, 2000).  Adding information like “ .  .  .  and so did Paul” to (1) does not create an overt contradiction (as would be the case in [2]), but would instead simply signal disagreement or discontent.  Crucially, adding such information to (1) does not result in ungrammaticality.  Thus, clefts and exclusives behave differently with respect to the exhaustive effects they convey, suggesting that they do not possess identical underlying semantics. 1 Whereas “only” lexically encodes exhaustivity (i. e. , exhaustivity is part of the truth-conditional meaning), in cleft sentences exhaustivity is simply inferred, and has been argued to be pragmatically derived.  Consequently, and following Lambrecht (1994), we take clefts to be semantically equivalent to their canonical counterpart.  Theoretical work has examined how inferences arise and are processed in online comprehension (Bott & Noveck, 2004.  Levinson, 2000).  Other work has focused on how children acquire and process these aspects of meaning (especially with respect to scalar implicatures.  Chierchia, Crain, Guasti, Gualmini, & Meroni, 2001.  Noveck, 2001).  Less research exists on second language (L2) data.  For the French c’est-cleft, most previous studies have examined production and use (Donaldson, 2012.  Katz, 1997.  Reichle, 2008), and Dekydtspotter and Farmer (2016) recently examined effects of structural priming.  Yet, no L2 study to our knowledge has examined the exhaustive inference of c’est-clefts.  The ﬁrst contribution this paper makes is thus empirical.  it provides novel data on an aspect of French clefts that remains understudied in the L2 literature.  Using ofﬂine data, the main goal of this paper is to examine the following overarching question.  after acquiring the syntax of the c’est-cleft, at what point do L2 learners acquire the associated pragmatic inference of exhaustivity.  We rely on data from two control groups (English NSs and French NSs) as a baseline.  Because deriving the exhaustive inference involves both syntax and discourse pragmatics, examining the acquisition of this inference constitutes an appropriate testing ground for the interface hypothesis (IH.  Sorace 2011, 2012.  Sorace & Filiaci, 2006), which posits that syntax–discourse interface phenomena pose unique and potentially insurmountable difﬁculties in L2 acquisition.  Accordingly, the second contribution of this paper is theoretical, contributing to the debate on the L2 acquisition of interface properties. 