INTRODUCTION.  Until 1997, the healthcare needs of Brazilian transsexual people received little to no attention from the public health system (Sistema Unico de Saude – SUS).  Indeed, one of their main healthcare concerns, i. e.  sex reassignment surgeries, was regarded as a crime of mutilation by the Federal Board of Medicine (FBM).  This changed, however, with the publication of FBM Resolution 1. 482/97, in which sex reassignment surgeries were allowed to be performed as an experimental ‘treatment’ to resolve transsexual individuals’ dissatisfaction with their morphological sex.  Since then, the regulation for Brazilian transspecific healthcare policies has undergone constant revision.  The most recent governmental documents regulating gender identity clinics in the country are the Ministry of Health Decree 2. 803/2013 and the FBM Resolution 1. 955/ 2010.  the former institutionalizes the Brazilian Transsexualizing Process (‘Processo Transexualizador’) within the SUS and allows the government to subsidize surgeries and hormone therapies.  the latter revises previous resolutions and more clearly defines the FBM’s viewpoints on transsexuality and its medical management.  According to the Brazilian documents, ‘the transsexual patient has a permanent psychological disorder and [because of this] rejects his/her phenotype and tends to self-mutilate and/or commit suicide’ (Brasil 2010).  Due to their pathologized status, transsexual people who wish to have their healthcare subsidized by the State must be diagnosed as suffering from a Gender Identity Disorder (GID) – a term coined by the American Psychiatric Association (APA) in the fourth version of its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). 2 Thus, it is a psychiatric diagnosis which guides Brazilian trans-specific healthcare policies and, as a consequence, informs the interactions between transsexual people at gender identity clinics and their doctors.  Interestingly, though, the Brazilian documents never mention the DSM as a diagnostic resource.  However, fieldwork in one of the Brazilian gender clinics has shown that it is the APA’s diagnostic criteria which guide doctors’ clinical gaze (Foucault 2001) when talking to a transsexual person.  In this scenario, the medical management of transsexual individuals at Brazilian public hospitals provides an analytical avenue for the sociolinguistic critique of a macro-sociological process the editors of this Special Issue allude to in their introduction, namely discursive colonization.  This concept refers to the ease and rapidity with which certain authoritative Western discursive frameworks and their respective texts circulate globally and end up imposing ex-centric (Bhabha 1994) institutional standards of textuality by which the global South must comply, obliterating, thus, local culture-specific discourses, practices and subjectivities.  In this context, the first aim of this paper is to critically assess the epistemological dynamics which make the global circulation of the APA manual possible.  The centrality of this diagnostic text is also relevant for our understanding of how interactions between doctors and transsexual people unfold, and, most significantly, how identity (de)legitimation is interactionally negotiated in these ex-centric, globalized terms.  In fact, the necessity of a psychiatric diagnosis within the APA’s terms imposes interactional tensions.  As argued by Teixeira (2013), for example, the GID diagnosis is the result of discursive strategies deployed by clinic users to convince doctors they fit the diagnostic criteria.  In this scenario, worried they will be denied access to the clinic services, transsexual clients rapidly learn ‘the necessary life-history required for successful “passing”’ (Hird 2002.  583).  Although the learning and the telling of an adequate narrative is frequently referred to in the literature which analyses the little resonance such diagnostic criteria have in transsexual people’s lives (Butler 2004.  Bento 2006.  Stone 2007 [1991].  Teixeira 2013), these analyses are largely based on secondhand, retrospective accounts of transsexual people about their experiences with doctors.  As such, little do we know of the interactional in situ instantiation of such ‘adequate narrative’, let alone the learning trajectory that leads to the narrative shape, content, and pragmatic effects.  Understanding the micro-interactional processes that lead to the materialization of such text-based, diagnostically driven, ex-centric narrative standards is the second aim of this paper.  Within language and gender studies, research on interactions between health professionals and transsexual people has been developed by Susan Speer (Speer 2009, 2010, 2011).  However, Speer’s allegiance to conversation analysis’s (CA) understanding of context as co-text (Billig 1999), and focus on what members explicitly orient to, impel her to take the status of transsexuality as a mental disorder for granted.  As such, her CA studies overlook the centrality of the diagnostic manuals to the relationships within the gender clinic she investigates.  Needless to say, transsexual clients will hardly ever admit to their doctors they are familiar with the diagnostic texts.  Physicians, in turn, will seldom tell their interlocutors they perceive the rehearsed quality of the narratives (Maryns 2006) of ‘true’ transsexuality and grow intensely suspicious of what the clients say.  This is testimony to the fact that the diagnostic texts may be regarded as an absent presence in these interactions.  indeed, they constitute a ‘ghost audience’ (Langellier 2001) which constrains the social actions of both transsexual people and their doctors.  In order to understand the role of these ex-centric diagnostic criteria in the relationships between health professionals and transsexual people, we must take into account the dynamics between what Goffman (1959) refers to as onstage and backstage performances.  In other words, we need to compare and contrast what happens in consultations (i. e.  their turn-by-turn interactional development) and the interlocutors’ attitudes and opinions about these interactions which are shared outside the consultation room.  The analytical enterprise, as Fabrıcio (2013.  146) puts it, is a task of ethnographically tracking down the textual webs that make visible ‘how social actors experience and reconstruct [their membership to social categories] in their everyday discursive practices’.  This kind of textual cartography involves looking into the macro-sociological dynamics which allow certain discourses to materialize as travelling texts (Blommaert 2005), i. e.  ones invested with the power and authority to circulate globally almost without contestation, and the effects of these itineraries in the micro-details of people’s daily institutional lives.  Having this in mind, the discussion in this paper is grounded in 13 months of ethnographic fieldwork at the Programa de Atenc~ao Integral a Saude Transexual (PAIST).  It investigates the intersubjective effects of the importation of the DSM diagnostic criteria, their standards of textuality, and narrative resources in the lives of transsexual people and their doctors.  During fieldwork, the PAIST had three main health professionals (a surgeon, a psychologist, and a psychiatrist) and two visiting physicians who were specializing in urological surgeries.  Here, specifically, I present a case study of one of the research participants’ first contacts with the PAIST to highlight the discursive processes that lead her to locally refashion her life history within the textual modes of the DSM.  As the analyses show, the necessity of such a narrative refashioning exemplifies the ex-centricity of such medical texts within the Brazilian context.  This will lead me to.  (1) discuss the intersubjective effects of such narrative refashioning on the clinic users’ situated relationships with their doctors.  and (2) reflect on the possibilities of a sociolinguistics from the South, i. e.  an approach to discourse and interaction that takes discursive colonization and its local effects seriously.  <Middle> TRAVELLING TEXTS AND EPISTEMOLOGICAL IMBALANCES.  A CRITIQUE FROM/ABOUT THE SOUTH.  The DSM-IVR is described as a ‘helpful guide to medical practice’ which provides ‘brevity of criteria sets, clarity of language, and explicit statements of the constructs embodied in the diagnostic criteria’ (American Psychiatric Association 1994.  xv) and is thus regarded as a useful guide to clinical practice among psychiatrists.  However, one needs to problematize the epistemological and political processes that transform this manual into a highly mobile text (Blommaert 2010) which is able to shape healthcare policies around the globe.  To a great extent, but not exclusively, two interrelated socio-cultural and discursive dynamics contribute to the global itinerary of this text and constitute a process Briggs (2005) describes as the globalization of medical epistemologies.  (1) the medicalization of society.  and (2) epistemological colonization produced by what Connell (2007) and Grosfoghel (2011) refer to as the universalizing tendencies of ‘Western’ theories.  ‘[M]edicalization describes a process by which nonmedical problems become defined and treated as medical problems, usually in terms of illness and disorders’ (Conrad 2007.  4).  This is the case in transsexuality, but it is not restricted to it.  A number of human experiences have also been medicalized, such as baldness, menstruation, hyperactivity, ageing, etc.  Conrad argues that medicalization is a form of social control.  by redefining such life experiences in medical terms and imposing treatment procedures, a line between what is normal and healthy and what is abnormal and, thus, unhealthy, is drawn.  This, in turn, gives medicine the power to prescribe which human experiences, subjectivities and bodies are deemed appropriate.  In this scenario, the DSM is both constituted by and constitutive of such medico-social processes.  On the one hand, it reflects these broader social dynamics.  on the other, it performatively produces (new) disorders and foments their medical surveillance.  The publication of the DSM-V in 2012 illustrates the extent to which processes of medicalization have reached, as it considerably multiplied the number of mental disorders a psychiatrist can treat.  among them we find, for instance, male hypoactive sexual desire disorder (tellingly, there is no female counterpart to this).  The financial interests of pharmaceutical industries also deserve part of the credit for the intensification of this process (Conrad 2007).  In this context, it is difficult to determine which comes first.  the disorder or the drugs.  Conrad seems to believe that in many cases the creation of a disease follows the production of a drug.  For instance, Conrad explains that, in the 1970s, the pharmaceutical company Upjohn discovered minoxidil was able to lower heart rate.  During clinical trials for hypertension, however, researchers accidentally noticed male patients grew new hair on their heads.  thus new target consumers for minoxidil were created and baldness became a medical problem.  With regards to transsexuality, its close relation to the developments in endocrinology in the 20th century, the growing hormone market and the technological advances in plastic and genital reconstructive surgery make gender transitions possible and highly profitable in some countries. 