Resolving linguistic ambiguities can reveal tendencies in the use of provided information, or biases toward one of the possible interpretations, that can be easily overlooked otherwise.  In this paper we use temporarily ambiguous sentences to examine whether gender markings may function as cues moderating the assignment of thematic roles in complex relative clause constructions.  The processing of sentence (1) may appear as difﬁcult as that of sentence (2), as they both contain object-extracted relative clauses (ORC).  Sentences (3) and (4) contain subjectextracted relative clauses (SRC), and therefore (3) may seem equally difﬁcult to comprehend as (4).  (1) The beautician, whom both designers recognized, is experienced.  (2) The artist, whom both designers recognized, is experienced.  (3) The beautician, who recognized both designers, is experienced.  (4) The artist, who recognized both designers, is experienced.  However, there is evidence that certain features shared by nouns or noun phrases (e. g. , animacy) facilitate the assignment of speciﬁc thematic roles, such as when agent roles are assigned more easily to animate and patient roles to inanimate nouns (e. g. , Bornkessel-Schlesewsky & Schlesewsky, 2009.  MacDonald, 1994.  Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Kello, 1993).  While claims about animate nouns as better agents (Gennari & MacDonald, 2008) and inanimate nouns as poorer agents (Clifton et al. , 2003.  Just & Carpenter, 1992) have already been supported by empirical evidence, the claim about gender cues as predictors of good or poor agents has not yet been demonstrated experimentally.  At the same time, similarly to animacy when described as a “supralinguistic” concept (Yamamoto, 1991) affecting linguistic phenomena (e. g. , word order), gender can be regarded as a fundamental semantic dimension expressed on biological and social levels (Ridgeway, 2001) with various linguistic representations (e. g. , grammatical1 [der Musiker/die Musikerin “the musicianmasculine/feminine” in German], natural [woman/man], deﬁnitional [mother/father], and stereotypical [nurse/surgeon] gender).  Based on psycholinguistic and sociocognitive research on gender that will be discussed in more detail below, this study attempts to clarify whether gender, along with animacy, may affect the identiﬁcation of thematic roles.  Previous research has reported gender-related observations, such as case syncretism of feminines in German (Krifka, 2009) and the strong link between agency and masculinity (Koenig, Mitchell, Eagly, & Ristikari, 2011), suggesting that entities possessing female characteristics may be less agentive and therefore more likely to serve as thematic patients.  If this is the case, then stereotypically female beautician may be perceived as a better patient compared to neutral artist (i. e. , receiving an action) in the ORC sentences, making the comprehension of (1) easier than (2).  Similarly, neutral artist may be perceived as a better agent compared to stereotypically female beautician (i. e. , producing an action) in the SRC sentences, making (4) easier than (3).  The experiments reported in the present paper use relative clause structures in German as a tool to address this issue.  THEMATIC STRUCTURE AND PROMINENCE HIERARCHIES.  A number of studies invoked thematic structure to explain biases that inﬂuence the interpretation of complex linguistic constructions, such as relative clauses (e. g. , Boland, Tanenhaus, Garnsey, & Carlson, 1995.  Pickering & Traxler, 1998.  Pickering, Traxler, & Crocker, 2000.  Traxler, Morris, & Seely, 2002).  Evaluating the role of various factors in the comprehension of relative clauses, previous research has repeatedly shown that ORCs are more difﬁcult to process than SRCs (Gordon, Hendrick, & Johnson, 2001.  Staub, 2010.  Traxler, Williams, Blozis, & Morris, 2005).  However, Mak, Vonk, and Schriefers (2002, 2006) and Traxler et al.  (2002) demonstrated that ORCs with inanimate heads, such as The movie that the director watched received the prize, were almost as easy to comprehend as SRCs of the type The director that watched the movie received a prize.  Thus, the feature of animacy has been shown to modulate the difﬁculty in the interpretation of relative clauses, showing that linguistic characteristics are a signiﬁcant factor modulating the likelihood of the assignment of an agent role to one of the two nouns in a sentence.  The expectations readers have about entities possessing certain characteristics to occupy syntactically prominent positions in a sentence can be seen within the framework of the thematic hierarchy hypothesis (e. g. , Grimshaw, 1990.  Jackendoff, 1987).  This hypothesis lists the ordering of thematic roles by prominence, with the agent role ranking the highest on the hierarchy of semantic features.  At the same time, prominence can be assessed along several dimensions other than thematic agency, such as animacy, deﬁniteness, or person, with animate entities ranking over inanimate, deﬁnite over indeﬁnite, and ﬁrst and second person over third (Lamers & de Swart, 2012).  The tripartite animacy hierarchy proposed by Croft (1990) offers a similar ordering by person (ﬁrst and second over third), NP-type (pronouns over common nouns), and animacy itself (human over nonhuman, animate over inanimate).  The deﬁnition of the agentive case, given by Fillmore as “the typically animate perceived instigator of the action identiﬁed by the verb” (1968, p. 