I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Cross-linguistic research is essential to theoretical development in language acquisition research, allowing us to determine universal as opposed to language-specific constraints on the acquisition process.  One structure that has received considerable attention in the grammatical acquisition literature is the relative clause (henceforth RC) (see Kidd, ).  In this paper we present three studies that investigated the acquisition of RCs in children acquiring Finnish, a language for which there is little data on RC acquisition.  Acquisition of relative clauses.  Most research on the acquisition of RCs has focused on age of acquisition and the level of difficulty children experience in naturalistic and experimental contexts with subject RCs such as (), object RCs such as (), and oblique RCs such as ().  () The dog that __ chased the cat.  () The cat that the dog chased ___.  () The dog to whom the boy gave the bone ___.  The general consensus amongst many scholars is that subject RCs are essentially easier to acquire than non-subject RCs, based on the following.  (a) subject RCs have been reported to emerge at an earlier developmental stage in naturalistic child language than non-subject RCs (e. g.  Brandt, Diessel & Tomasello, .  Diessel, .  Diessel & Tomasello, ).  (b) the majority of experimental evidence suggests that children perform best on subject RCs in comparison to other RC types (e. g.  Adani, .  de Villiers, Tager Flusberg, Hakuta & Cohen, .  Diessel & Tomasello, .  Friedmann, Belletti & Rizzi, .  Goodluck, .  Guasti, Stavrakaki & Arosio, .  Kas & Lukács, ), although more recently some scholars have noted that this effect appears to be modulated by distributional and typological features of individual languages (Arnon, .  Brandt, Kidd, Lieven & Tomasello, .  Diessel, .  Kidd, Brandt, Lieven & Tomasello ).  Even though there is general agreement on subject RC advantage over other RC types, there are several competing theoretical explanations for the effect, ranging from appeals to the primacy of subjects in syntactic derivation (either typologically.  Keenan & Comrie, .  or formally.  Rizzi, ), appeals to processing routines and memory capacity (O’Grady, ), and appeals to distributional frequency (Diessel, .  Kidd et al. , ).  These approaches often make very similar predictions and can be difficult to distinguish.  In the current paper we take a usage-based perspective, assuming that linguistic representations of structure are constructed on the basis of experience.  From this perspective we consider why, for Finnish, we do not observe a clear subject advantage in RC acquisition.  Subject–non-subject RC asymmetry.  The evidence for the subject–object asymmetry largely comes from a fairly narrow range of languages where RCs display distinct structural similarities (e. g.  English, German, and Hebrew).  In terms of RCs, these all are ‘head-first’ languages (i. e.  the RC comes after the (head)noun that it modifies).  Data from languages whose RCs do not display ‘head-first’ syntactic structure are less clear.  For instance, acquisition studies with children acquiring Basque (Carreiras, Duñabeitia, Vergara, de la Cruz-Pavía & Laka, .  Gutierrez-Mangado, ), Chinese (Chan, Matthews & Yip, .  Chen & Shirai, ), Japanese (Ozeki & Shirai, .  Suzuki, ), and Quechua (Courtney, ) either show no difference between subject and object RCs (the most common comparison), an object RC advantage, or mixed results depending on the methodology used.  Even though data from Basque, Chinese, Japanese, and Quechua suggest that there may be no universal subject RC dominance, comparing data from these languages directly with languages like English, German, and Hebrew can be problematic for two reasons.  First, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Basque are ‘head-final’ languages (i. e.  the RC precedes the noun that it modifies).  This means that RCs in these languages are structurally distinctly different from languages like English, which might explain the cross-linguistic differences in developmental and processing patterns observed between these two language groups.  Second, the comparison might not be warranted because, at least for some head-final languages (e. g.  East Asian languages), typologists have questioned whether true RCs actually exist (Comrie, ).  Finnish RCs, like English, German, and Hebrew RCs, are head-first structures.  Due to the highly inflected nature of Finnish, its flexible word order, and the distributional frequencies of RCs, the acquisition of Finnish RCs is relevant to the question as to whether all head-first languages show subject dominance.  Linguistic properties of relative clauses in Finnish, and their acquisition Finnish is a head-ﬁrst, nominative–accusative language.  Prototypically, a RC directly follows its head noun.  Finnish has three relative pronouns.  JOKA and KUKA, which often refer to animate entities, and MIKÄ, which often, but not necessarily, refers to inanimate entities (Hakulinen, Vilkuna, Korhonen, Koivisto, Heinonen & Alho, ).  This is similar to English speakers having the option of using that, who, or which.  Unlike English, but similarly to German, Finnish relative pronouns are inﬂected for case and number.  Relative pronouns are obligatory, and their case usually indicates what role the relativized element plays within the RCs.  The nominative predominantly expresses the grammatical case of subject.  the accusative, partitive, and, in some instances the genitive and nominative, express the object.  genitive expresses the possessive.  and the rest of the ﬁfteen cases are locative or marginal (Hakulinen et al. , .  Laaksonen & Lieko, ).  Indirect objects are expressed in the same way as oblique cases (i. e.  by using a locative inﬂection on the noun).  Examples ()–() exemplify subject, object, and oblique RCs.  () Kissakoiraalöi Cat-NOM which-NOM hit-past-sg dog-PART[OBJ] ‘The cat which hit a dog’ () Koirakissa[OBJ] Dog-NOM which-PART cat-NOM hit-past-sg[SUBJ] ‘The dog which the cat hit’ () Sohvakoira[OBL] Sofa-NOM which-ABL dog-NOM fall-past-sg‘The sofa from/oﬀ which a dog fell’Acquisition of relative clauses in Finnish.  A small number of previous studies have touched upon Finnish RC acquisition (e. 