Prosody plays an important part in the production and comprehension of the organization of speech, manifested by patterns of intonation, rhythm, prominence, and chunking of the speech continuum.  Several form–meaning relations are established or contributed to by prosody, namely, sentence type distinctions, the highlighting of important information, the demarcation of speech units (also known as phrasing), and different kinds of affective meanings (Halliday, 1967.  Ladd, 2008).  Many prosodic form–meaning relations convey linguistic meanings, that is, meanings related to the message, such as interrogativity, ﬁnality, or focus, which may (or not) be grammaticalized in different languages and in different ways (Gussenhoven, 2002, 2016).  For example, interrogativity tends to be signaled by high or rising pitch, and ﬁnality by low pitch (as in English or Portuguese), but in Swedish a ﬁnal low tone is used both in statements and questions.  focus in West Germanic languages is typically achieved by the presence of a pitch contour in the prominent element (accentuation) and absence of accentuation on words that follow the prominent element, whereas other languages may use different types of accents to contrast focused and unfocused words (such as Portuguese.  Frota, 2014).  Other prosodic form–meaning relations express meanings related to the state of the speaker, such as the affective meanings of (un)happy or (un)cooperative, which tend to be less arbitrary and thus less language speciﬁc (Gussenhoven,Given the broad role played by prosody, it is not surprising that it has taken a leading role in spoken communication and language development.  Prosodic skills have been shown to be essential for language acquisition, and it is known that children have the ability to understand differences conveyed by prosodic features from birth and to use prosody to extract relevant information for lexical and syntactic analysis early in development (e. g. , Gervain & Mehler, 2010.  H¨ohle, 2009.  Morgan & Demuth 1996).  At the same time, however, certain domains/functions of prosody do not seem to be mastered in an adultlike fashion before puberty, such as prosodic comprehension skills involved in chunking, or the prosodic abilities required to understand or produce ﬁnal focus in English and Dutch (e. g. , Chen, 2011.  Wells, Pepp´e, & Goulandris, 2004).  Furthermore, prosody can be impaired in a large number of clinical populations with language or communication problems, such as speciﬁc language disorders (e. g. , Wells & Pepp´e, 2003), deafness (e. g. , Parker & Rose, 1990), Down syndrome (e. g. , Heselwood, Bray, & Crookston, 1995), Williams syndrome (e. g. , Catterall, Howard, Stojanovik, Szczerbinski, & Wells, 2006), aphasia (e. g. , Seddoh, 2004), schizophrenia (e. g. , Pascual, Sol´e, Castill´on, Abad´ıa, & Tejedor, 2005), epilepsy (e. g. , Sanz-Mart´ın, Guevara, CorsiCabrera, Ondarza-Rovira, & Ramos-Loyo, 2006), and autism spectrum disorders (e. g. , Baltaxe & Simmons, 1985.  Filipe, Frota, Castro, & Vicente, 2014.  Filipe, Frota, Villagomez, & Vicente, 2016).  It is important to note that although the functions of prosody tend to be quite general across languages, prosodic systems are known to vary considerably, and prosodic cues are strikingly language speciﬁc (Frota & Prieto, 2015a.  Jun, 2005, 2014.  Ladd, 2008).  Therefore, studies focusing on different languages are critical for cross-linguistic comparisons, which in turn are necessary for a better understanding of prosodic development and prosodic impairments.  These are strong reasons for prosodic skills to be more widely studied in typical and impaired language development.  European Portuguese (EP) poses challenging questions for the study of language development, due to the atypical prosodic proﬁle of the language.  EP includes properties of both Romance and Germanic languages in its phonology and prosody.  EP prosody combines typical Romance properties with Germaniclike properties.  Unlike Spanish, the rhythm of EP is characterized by a mix of syllable-timed and stress-timed features, thus combining Romance-like syllable timing with Germanic-like stress timing (Frota & Vig´ario, 2001).  EP displays a clear cluster of cues to signal the beginnings and ends of words, like English and other Germanic languages, but at the same time allows for ﬁnal word consonants to take the initial position of the following word (resyllabiﬁcation) as in Romance languages (Vig´ario, 2003).  The intonation contours of EP are characterized by sparse accentuation.  that is, they show fewer tonal events than in Spanish or other Romance languages, approximating the hat pattern contour characteristic of Dutch (Frota, 2014).  However, like Spanish, there is no deaccenting of the sort found in West Germanic languages when the prominence is not ﬁnal in the utterance (Frota, 2014.  Frota & Prieto, 2015b).  In addition, unlike in English, pitch accent placement is not the critical means to express focus.  In Romance languages several strategies may apply to convey narrow/contrastive focus depending on the language/variety, namely, the use of a particular type of pitch accent, sometimes with the presence of postnuclear accents, or changes in word order (Frota, 2014.  Ladd, 2008).  In the case of EP, all the Romance-like strategies have been reported to apply, with the prosodic focus strategy signaled by a particular type of accentuation being the most frequently used by Standard EP speakers (Fernandes, 2007.  Frota, 2000, 2014).  In short, EP stands as an interesting case for the study of prosodic development, with cross-linguistic implications for the understanding of developmental paths for form–meaning relations in different languages, as well as for the understanding of prosodic impairments.  Research on prosodic skills requires the development of tools to assess prosody in a systematic and comprehensive way adapted to the speciﬁcities of the language observed.  The use of diverse methodologies of prosodic assessment may lead to contradictory ﬁndings and/or to ﬁndings that cannot be compared (McCann & Pepp´e, 2003.  Pepp´e et al. , 2010).  There are presently few procedures available to assess prosodic abilities.  For instance, in the United Kingdom, there is the Prosody Proﬁle (Crystal, 1982), which depends on the transcription of the intonation of spontaneous speech samples.  In the United States, the Prosody-Voice Screening Proﬁle is used, also requiring transcription, for the assessment of spoken language in seven domains, three of which are prosodic domains.  phrasing, speech rate, and stress (Shriberg, Kwiatkowski, & Rasmussen, 1990).  In Sweden, the Swedish procedure is used to evaluate prosody at the word, phrase, and discourse levels (Samuelsson, Scocco, & Nettelbladt, 2003).  However, none of these instruments assesses prosodic discrimination and comprehension of meaning differences conveyed by prosodic features.  The only test available to examine both receptive and expressive prosodic abilities in children over 4 years of age is the Proﬁling Elements of Prosody in Speech-Communication (PEPS-C.  Pepp´e & McCann, 2003) developed in the United Kingdom.  The PEPS-C has the following advantages.  (a) transcription skills of both lexical and prosodic elements are not needed.  (b) samples of speech are elicited in a homogeneous way across subjects and types of populations.  (c) the content of responses is the same for all participants.  (d) instructions are suitable for individuals who may have low cognitive level.  and (e) it may provide a systematic and comparable way to assess prosodic abilities in different languages.  Originally, the PEPS-C only assessed prosody in adults (Pepp´e, Maxim, & Wells, 2000), but it was revised in 2004 and norms for typically developing children were collected (Wells et al. , 2004).  Subsequently, it has been adapted to different languages, such as Spanish, Flemish, French, and Norwegian (Pepp´e et al. , 2010).  Given the absence of a procedure for the assessment of Portuguese prosody throughout the school years, and the lack of studies on EP prosodic development covering this age range, we adapted an English test (the PEPS-C) for use with EP speakers.  With the Portuguese version of the PEPS-C, we analyzed the developmental changes of several components of prosody between 5 years of age and adulthood.  The PEPS-C includes tasks at two levels.  formal and functional.  The formal level assesses auditory discrimination and production abilities (related to perceptual and motor skills) required to perform the tasks.  The functional level takes into account four prosodic functions (related to cognitive understanding and expression) organized in the four subtests affect, turn-end, chunking, and focus.  The affect subtest is associated with the expression of feelings or emotions, that is, with affective meanings in the sense of Gussenhoven (2016.  for instance, a more prolonged and high intonation suggests positive affects, as shown in Banse & Scherer, 1996).  Speciﬁcally, it uses the difference between like and dislike intonation.  As the intonation patterns used in the expression of liking and disliking in EP were largely unknown, a study was performed to provide a systematic account of these prosodic patterns (Filipe, Branco, Frota, Castro, & Vicente, 2015).  The results showed that, as in English, in EP the meaning of liking is expressed by rise–fall pitch movements.  However, for disliking, the EP results showed a more ﬂat melodic pattern with a fall in the stressed syllable.  These ﬁndings have shown that the intonation patterns for liking and disliking exhibit differences across languages (namely, in English, Spanish, and EP), highlighting the language speciﬁcity of prosodic contours even in the expression of affective meanings.  The other three subtests examine linguistic meanings.  The turn-end subtest uses the differences between interrogative and declarative intonation.  In EP, as in English, interrogatives are expressed by rising intonation, whereas declaratives are marked by falling intonation (e. g. , Frota, 2002).  However, unlike in English, which uses word order together with prosody to differentiate interrogatives from declaratives, in EP the interrogative/declarative distinction is crucially marked by prosody only (Frota, 2002.  Frota, Butler, & Vig´ario, 2014.  Mateus et al. , 2003).  The chunking subtest relates to the prosodic cues that disambiguate the syntactic structure of what is being said (e. g. , the segmentation of utterances marked by prosodic features, such as pauses).  The chunking function is expressed through similar prosodic correlates in English and EP, as EP resorts to ﬁnal lengthening, pitch movement, and pauses (e. g. , Fal´e, 2005.  Frota, 2000.  Vig´ario, 2003).  However, languages may weigh the various prosodic cues for chunking differently (Seidl & Cristia, 2008.  Wellmann, Holzgrefe, Truckenbrodt, Wartenburger, & H¨ohle, 2012), and there are no studies on cue weighting for EP.  The focus subtest uses prominence to signal the element that carries more informative load, that is, the element that is highlighted in the utterance.  Previous work on prosodic focus in EP had shown that the prosodic strategy (i. e. , placement of main prominence and use of a particular pitch accent) is frequently used by Standard EP speakers (Fernandes, 2007.  Frota, 2000, 2014).  As in English, contrastive focus in EP is generally expressed by means of prominence and intonation, although in important different ways.  In English, pitch accent placement, together with deaccenting of given (i. e. , nonfocused elements) are the main strategies used.  in EP, focus is expressed by choice of pitch accent type and there is no systematic deaccenting of nonprominent material (e. g. 