A central assumption of most models of reading acquisition is that children start out by decoding words on a letter-by-letter basis at ﬁrst (Ehri, 1995.  Grainger & Ziegler, 2011.  Seymour, 2005.  Share, 1995).  They learn grapheme–phoneme correspondence (GPC) mappings and sound out words.  As their reading skills develop and they gain more experience with written words, it is assumed that they become sensitive to intermediate-sized units until they are ﬁnally able to decode whole words directly “on sight. ” For example, Seymour’s (2005) dual-foundation model proposes that reading develops in phases.  It is thought to begin with simple alphabetic decoding using phonemes and advances to increasingly more complex structures, ﬁrst centered around rimes, and in the last stage using syllables and morphemes.  Equally, the multiple-route model of orthographic processing (Grainger & Ziegler, 2011) assumes that beginning readers start out by decoding words on a phonology-driven letter-by-letter basis (cf.  Share, 1995) that leads them to two routes of orthographic processing.  a ﬁne-grained and a coarse-grained route.  The main difference between the ﬁne-grained and coarse-grained routes is the coding of letter positions.  the ﬁne-grained route is sensitive to ordered letter sequences, whereas letter coding in the coarse-grained route is position invariant.  As a consequence, the coarse-grained route entails direct access from orthography to semantics via whole words, whereas the ﬁne-grained route is tuned to detect frequently co-occurring letter sequences as functional units for word recognition.  Both syllables and morphemes feature frequently co-occurring letter sequences and can thus be suspected to function as sensible intermediate-sized units that are detected in the ﬁne-grained route.  Albeit being formally very similar in terms of size and features of letter position coding, syllables and morphemes differ from each other in how they are deﬁned and what type of information they encode.  Syllables are phonologically deﬁned and encode information about pronunciation. 