INTRODUCTION.  This study investigates narrative development from a multimodal perspective of a less-studied language, Zulu, a Bantu language spoken in South Africa, and compares this development to a Romance language, French.  We explore similarities and differences of narrative ability from (i) a developmental and (ii) a cross-linguistic perspective in a comparison of these linguistically non-related languages.  Most literature on the development of pragmatic ability usually investigates one modality – speech.  Several studies have shown evidence that during face-to-face and verbal communication, a speaker or listener integrates information from both auditory and visual sources into a single message (Beattie, .  Beattie & Shovelton, .  Kendon, , .  Kita & Özyürek, , McNeill, ).  Oral narrative performance includes auditory (linguistic signals and prosody) and visual (gesture) information.  However, the way that people integrate speech and gesture into their narrative behaviour is highly dependent on language and culture (Colletta et al. , ).  The oral narrative from a multimodal perspective.  Speakers usually organize experiences and memories of human happenings in the form of a narrative (Berman, .  Bruner, .  Peterson & McCabe, ).  The narrative format is conventional, culturally transmitted, and restricted by each individual user’s level of mastery.  Fayol () explains that from a cognitive perspective in order to understand a narrative, a listener must construct a mental model of a situation to facilitate comprehension of that situation.  In terms of language production, the construction of an original story is a complex and demanding process involving planning and organizing ideas beyond the sentence level as well as self-regulation of formulation and presuppositional capacities, i. e. , pragmatic skills (Hadley & Schuele, .  Moonsamy, Jordaan & Greenop, ).  Thus, to narrate a story requires the integration of several abilities.  In addition to linguistic difficulties, it presents a more cognitive challenge of developing the contents in hierarchically ordered sequential structures.  Available research on narrative abilities mainly focuses on one dimension, the verbal dimension (oral or written), and the dimension of gesture is yet to be included to produce a better understanding of the contextualization of language knowledge and development.  Over the past thirty years, research on gesture and its relation to speech points to the multimodal nature of language (Calbris, .  Kendon, .  McNeill, ).  Daily human communication is mediated by a constant and intertwined flow of auditory speech signals and visual–kinesic gesture signals.  Whilst there is no consensus of what could be a ‘universal’ classification of gestures (for examples see Guidetti, Fibigerova & Colletta, ), the one proposed by McNeill (, ) is a heuristic one.  Speakers spontaneously produce gestures that are directly linked to speech and the verbal message content.  Co-speech gestures appear to have multiple functions.  on the one hand, they convey information to the interlocutor (Alibali, Kita & Young, .  Goldin-Meadow & Butcher, .  Kendon, , .  McNeill, ), and on the other hand, they seem to fulfil some cognitive functions.  i. e. , some studies suggest that gestures also serve a purpose for speakers to access the mental lexicon in spontaneous speech (de Ruiter, .  Krauss, Chen & Chawla, ).  Some referential gestures (pointing and representational gestures) are used to indicate the referent and represent objects and ideas (Alibali et al. , .  McNeill, ).  Other ‘pragmatic’ gestures help the speaker express his/her immediate intentions, mental states, and feelings (Kendon, ).  They help frame the utterance by expressing its illocutionary force.  They also help to structure the discourse production at various levels from sentence components, such as the syllable or word, to discourse components, such as the thesis and its arguments, or when retelling and commenting during a narrative (see Kendon, , for a comprehensive review of the functions of gesture).  All in all, research on gesture has demonstrated the multimodal nature of face-to-face and verbal communication.  A speaker or listener integrates auditory and acoustic (linguistic, prosodic) and visual (gesture) information into a single message (Beattie, .  Beattie & Shovelton, .  Kendon, , .  Kita & Özyürek, .  McNeill, ).  Due to their functional polyvalence, co-speech gestures play a large part in the communicative process (Colletta, .  Kendon, . 