INTRODUCTION.  SITUATING THE STUDY This article examines the nexus of non-normative gender/sexual and national identities within Singapore’s contemporary LGBTQ movement.  Drawing upon Puar’s concept of ‘homonormative nationalism’ or ‘homonationalism’ (Puar 2007), I view it speciﬁcally as a form of discourse, and extend it, particularly, as a discursive strategy employed by a queer subaltern constituency in ‘doing’ a politics of pragmatic resistance in an illiberal city-state.  My focus is the Pink Dot movement in Singapore (or ‘Pink Dot SG’, a name which aligns sexual/ gender non-normativity with the nation), launched in 2009, which organises a large-scale, free-to-all public rally, themed ‘Freedom to Love’.  This is held annually in Hong Lim Park, the only public space in Singapore which allows the gathering of a mass assembly without an ofﬁcial license.  In this article, I explore the ‘impossible presence’ (Chan 2012) of a visibly optic queer event in a city-state that continues to criminalise gay sex and maintains a resolutely heteronormative public sphere.  My point of focus is on the promotional online videos produced annually, which have been pivotal to the success of the Pink Dot movement (Philips 2013).  A close multimodal analysis of one of the videos, titled ‘For Family.  For Friends.  For Love’, is analysed in order to explicate the discourse of homonationalism at work.  The analysis is situated within the dual perspectives of critical discourse studies (CDS) and ‘southern theory’ or, as I shall term it, ‘southern praxis’.  While it is assumed that sociolinguists are familiar with CDS, and so it requires less explanation, a southern praxis perspective will be outlined in greater detail.  CDS, motivated by goals of social justice and emancipation, is a perspective interested in the discursive dimensions of social issues that sustain asymmetrical power relations, which privilege certain groups in a society whilst disadvantaging and marginalising others.  the latter of which entails closure of life possibilities for disenfranchised subjects.  The term ‘critical’ is understood, broadly, to encompass the complex dynamics of power relations at work in any situation, in any given sociopolitical-historical moment.  While CDS has an established tradition of investigating various forms of hegemonic power structures, research on resistance as discursively articulated by historically marginalised groups remains largely underdeveloped.  The potential exists, nonetheless.  note, for example, Wodak and Meyer’s statement.  ‘CDA [or CDS] researchers are interested in the way discourse (re) produces social domination, that is the power abuse of one group over others, and how dominated groups may discursively resist such abuse’ (Wodak and Meyer 2009.  9, emphasis mine). 