INTRODUCTION.  Much of the recent research in sociolinguistics has aimed to account for new phenomena in a globalised society to better understand processes of power and knowledge production (Blommaert 2010.  Coupland 2003.  Heller 2011).  Issues of translation have remained largely overlooked in ‘globalisationsensitive’ sociolinguistics research, despite the fact that decisions on what languages can, cannot or must be used, automatically entail consequences for translation (Meylaerts 2011) and ultimately for access to information, opportunities for knowledge production, and equity.  This article explores issues of multilingualism, language and translation policy in the field of transnational civil society.  I focus on one of the key actors in global governance, namely international non-governmental organisations (INGOs), as these organisations are important global workplaces in the new information- and knowledge-based economy (Castells 2000).  INGOs are organised differently from multinational companies and international governmental organisations, and are characterised by a humanist, nonprofit ethos (Rubenstein 2015).  Many large INGOs have recently undergone huge organizational changes, clustering into federations, associations and international networks, often with tasks from the traditionally Western-based headquarters being decentralised to the East and South (Bond 2015b).  Exploring language practices at INGOs is thus a way to capture some of the new phenomena brought about by globalisation.  By focusing on these issues at the international human rights NGO Amnesty International, this article aims to contribute to debates in a number of disciplines.  Firstly, in sociolinguistics and translation studies, the article offers an empirically-grounded account of language and translation policies in a global organisation.  It contributes to a growing body of research on language ideologies and multilingualism in NGOs and INGOs in the global political economy (Codo and Garrido 2010.  Kahn and Heller 2006.  Muehlmann and Duch^ene 2007.  Pujolar 2007) and on the sociolinguistics of globalisation (Blommaert 2010.  Blommaert, Collins and Slembrouck 2005.  Coupland 2003.  Heller 2011.  Maryns 2006).  Secondly, in international relations, development studies and political science, the article contributes to ongoing debates on the legitimacy of INGOs, the paradox between INGOs’ ethos and their often corporate management style, and INGOs’ efforts to bridge the divide between the global North and South (Demars and Dijkzeul 2015.  Lang 2014.  Rubenstein 2015.  Yanacopulos 2015).  Overall, I use the case of translation policies at Amnesty International to argue for the need to include aspects of translation in future sociolinguistic research, and for a general move towards more interdisciplinary research to help us understand new phenomena in the context of the rise of language work in the global new economy (cf.  Heller 2010), and of INGOs as actors in global governance.  TRANSLATION AS A SOCIAL ACTIVITY AND TRANSLATION POLICY.  In line with sociologically-oriented research in translation studies, I consider translation as a sociological act that is inherently linked to the agents that carry out translation work and who are inﬂuenced by the institutions in which translation takes place (Angelelli 2012.  Wolf 2007).  Translation here is seen as a site of struggle, over who decides what is translated, in what way, in what languages, and who decides what counts as knowledge, legitimate language, or good practice (Heller 2008.  109).  My work has been inﬂuenced by ethnographic research on translation in institutional settings (Abdallah 2012.  Buzelin 2007.  Davier 2014.  Van Hout and Macgilchrist 2010), particularly Koskinen’s (2008) ethnographic study of translation at the European Union (EU), and by linguistic ethnography more generally.  Even though little of the ethnographic research in translation studies identiﬁes itself as linguistic ethnographic, the two central assumptions that Rampton, Maybin and Roberts (2015.  18) describe as likely to be shared by linguistic ethnographic researchers are present in much of this work.  (1) language and social life are mutually shaping and the social context in which communication (or translation) takes place should be investigated rather than assumed.  and (2) the internal organisation of semiotic data is essential to understanding its signiﬁcance and position in the world.  I agree with Flynn (2006.  45) that a linguistic ethnography of translation would be ‘a logical follow-through of linguistic approaches to translation that have increasingly taken the context of translation into account over the last ﬁfty years’.  For translation studies with a sociological grounding, linguistic ethnography, and related approaches such as linguistic anthropology and critical ethnographic sociolinguistics, are appealing because of their (socio)linguistic ethnographic commitment to examining empirical processes in light of the material, realworld changes associated with globalisation, and their ability to challenge established categories (Duranti 1997.  Heller 2011.  Rampton, Maybin and Roberts 2015).  Linguistic ethnography speciﬁcally positions itself as an interdisciplinary region, and researchers from a variety of disciplines have identiﬁed their work as linguistic ethnography (Snell, Shaw and Copland 2015.  Tusting and Maybin 2007).  In this article, I add a translation studies perspective to this growing interdisciplinary body of research by combining a linguistic ethnographic framework with concepts of language and translation policy to foster links between micro-data and broader levels of the organisation and extrainstitutional context.  Drawing on Interactional Sociolinguistics, Rampton (2007) describes that investigating speciﬁc situated communication processes can be wide-ranging and that analysis often involves a variety of foci, such as. 