 1.  INTRODUCTION The process of recognizing spoken language extends beyond the apprehension of linguistic meaning and includes the identiﬁcation of who uttered the message.  This indexical of (Abercrombie 1967) recognition process affects phoneme categorization boundaries (e. g.  Johnson, Strand and D’Imperio 1999.  Hay, Warren and Drager 2006), the integration of talker identity and meaning (Van Berkum et al.  2008), and the implicit acceptability of grammatical errors (Hanulıkova et al.  2012).  We refer to the process of listeners categorizing speakers’ identities as indexical identiﬁcation.  Within sociolinguistics, the notion of indexicality is typically applied to speakers’ use of linguistic variants to project stances and group membership (Silverstein 2003), and not to listener-based processes.  However, we take the position that a speaker indexes their linguistic identity, at least in part, for the beneﬁt of a listener, and we care to understand the context under which a listener is sensitive to variation indexed in the speech stream.  What determines listener accuracy in indexical recognition.  Experience and familiarity with the relevant accents play an important role.  Clopper and colleagues have found that residential history affects regional accent categorization in the United States, demonstrating that listeners are more accurate at categorizing accents when they have had more varied accent experiences (Clopper and Pisoni 2004a, 2004b).  Clopper and Pisoni (2006a, 2006b) go on to show that dialect familiarity biases listeners’ responses.  Listeners are less likely to use labels for less-familiar accents, and more likely to use the local standard accent label (Clopper and Pisoni 2006a, 2006b).  The authors reason that the local standard accent (e. g.  the accent that is standard on a local or regional level, but not standard over a larger geographical distance) can serve as a default reference for accent comparisons.  While listeners often perform best with familiar voices and accents, the standard accent can elicit heightened performance (Clopper and Bradlow 2008).  Thus, geographic mobility has been linked to differences in indexical and linguistic recognition tasks, but mobility and connections within a dialect or speech community have been researched to a lesser extent.  In the present study, we focus on Metro Vancouver, an urbanity comprising the city of Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, and its surrounding suburbs (see map in Figure 1).  In the context of this multicultural and multilingual community, we examine how familiarity affects indexical recognition of voices from selfidentiﬁed Chinese, East Indian, and White Canadian speakers of English, as we take a ﬁrst pass at ethnolinguistic variation in Vancouver English.  Simply, our goals are to investigate.  1.  whether ethnolinguistic varieties exist in Vancouver, British Columbia, as measured by ethnic identiﬁcation accuracy of voices by na€ıve listeners. 2.  how listeners’ connections within the larger Vancouver speech community moderate their indexical recognition accuracy.  To contextualize these goals, the following sections brieﬂy overview previous ethnolinguistic research in Canada and the history of the three most culturally and demographically dominant social groups in Vancouver who receive our1. 1 Language and ethnicity in the Lower Mainland What is now referred to as the Metro Vancouver or the Lower Mainland was and is Coast Salish territory (McMillan and Yellowhorn 2004.  Suttles 1990).  The languages spoken in these communities include hən̓ q̓ əmin̓ əm̓ , which is the downriver dialect of Halkomelem, and Sk̲ wx̱ wu7mesh snıchim, also known as Squamish (Gessner et al.  2014).  After millennia as the homeland of the Coast Salish people, Europeans and their Canadian-born descendants moved into what is now Vancouver in the 1860s, the majority of whom were Anglophones of British ancestry (Macdonald 1992).  Chinese immigrants speaking Cantonese and related Yue languages also arrived around this time, as did Punjabi immigrants from South Asia (Nayar 2004.  Yee 2006).  The presence of Cantonese, English, and Punjabi has grown since then, and today Canadians from these ethnolinguistic backgrounds are the largest three demographic groups in the Lower Mainland.  Unfortunately, colonization has whittled the percentage of aboriginal Canadians in Metro Vancouver to less than two percent, and fewer than ﬁve percent of these individuals speak a First Nations language (Statistics Canada 2013a).  therefore, Coast Salish people and languages were not a focus of this project.  English is arguably the region’s dominant language due to its prestige and demographic presence.  English is one of Canada’s two ofﬁcial languages, and the British Columbia Language Education Policy expects all primary and secondary public school students to achieve proﬁciency in English (British Columbia Ministry of Education 2004).  Fifty-two percent of Metro Vancouver respondents on the 2011 Census listed English as their mother tongue, and 69 percent stated it was their most frequently used home language (Statistics Canada 2012c).  Despite French being an ofﬁcial language of Canada, less than two percent of Metro Vancouver residents are native French speakers or speak it regularly at home.  In contrast, the two most frequent responses after English for both mother tongue and most-often-used home language were Punjabi and Cantonese (Statistics Canada 2012c).  Approximately six percent of respondents listed Punjabi as their mother tongue, and ﬁve percent provided Punjabi as their most frequent home language.  These ﬁgures are the same for Cantonese.  In speciﬁc suburbs, these numbers are even higher.  Sixteen percent of respondents from Richmond reported that Cantonese was their mother tongue, and 14 percent said it was their most frequent home language (Statistics Canada 2012a).  Twenty percent of respondents from Surrey, another major suburb of Vancouver, said Punjabi was their ﬁrst language, and 16 percent said it was the language most frequently spoken at home (Statistics Canada 2012b).  Besides the large demographic presence of Cantonese and Punjabi in Metro Vancouver, there are other reasons to believe that Cantonese and Punjabi Canadians raised and perhaps also born in Vancouver may have their own ethnolinguistic varieties.  They ﬁnd themselves in a cultural limbo where they may struggle to be accepted both as Canadians and as members of their heritage communities.  In Vancouver’s early days, restrictive immigration laws, head taxes, and other discriminatory hurdles targeted Asian immigrants and Canadian-born individuals of Asian descent (Nayar 2004.  Yee 2006).  The postwar period brought more rights to Asian Canadians, spurring increased immigration (Nayar 2004.  Ng 1999.  Yee 2006).  Asian Canadians have since begun the subtler struggle to be respected as neither ‘forever foreign’ nor ‘honorary white’ (Hall-Lew 2014.  Tuan 1998).  Canadian-raised Punjabis and Cantonese have faced tensions with their ﬁrst generation peers and their foreign-born relatives, some of whom accuse them of abandoning their culture (Nayar 2004.  Ng 1999.  Yee 2006).  Evidence for this contemporary struggle for identity is apparent in the terms used to differentiate between individuals who are Canadian born and those who are not (Hall-Lew 2014.  Nayar 2012.  Wong 2014).  According to Sharma and Sankaran (2011.  402), ethnolinguistic variation may be used to ‘mark afﬁliation or to inscribe new social boundaries. ’ Using heritage-language2 derived traits (or more local innovations) in the majority language may allow locally-born Asian Canadians without heritage-language ﬂuency to preserve their cultural identity (Leung 2012).  In addition, communication motivates linguistic choices.  Asian Canadians must use English to participate in mainstream institutions for economic success, but staying in touch with ﬁrst generation immigrant family members and peers may require rudimentary knowledge of the heritage language or adopting a different variety of English to ensure one is simultaneously understood whilst maintaining cultural ties.  1. 2 Ethnolinguistics in Canada and beyond.  While descriptive work on English in Vancouver has focused on White speakers (De Wolf et al.  2004), several groups of researchers have explored the pronunciation patterns of Canada’s speech communities in an effort to describe the variation used by a range of culturally diverse groups.  Canadian research investigating ethnolinguistic variation in English has largely focused on production of one or two linguistic features at a time or a single phonological trend.  In general, studies showed either subtle, speciﬁc, contextlimited differences or none at all.  For example, Hoffman and Walker (2010) and Hoffman (2010) concluded that there are no ‘stable’ ethnolinguistic varieties in Chinese and Italian English speaking communities in Toronto, based on the fact that the lower rates of Canadian Vowel Shift participation and t/d deletion found in older Cantonese and Italian Torontonians compared to the British group did not persist for the younger generations.  Baxter and Peters (2013) did ﬁnd differences in t/d deletion between second-generation Black Torontonians compared to the second-generation groups of Hoffman and Walker’s study (2010), but only in certain phonological environments.  Boberg’s (2004, 2014) investigations of the Canadian Shift illustrated differences between Italian Montrealers on one hand and British and Ashkenazi Jewish Montrealers on the other, but these did not hold across all Canadian Shift vowels, and again sometimes occurred only in speciﬁc phonological environments.  How realistic is the search for a few speciﬁc markers of ethnolinguistic identity in speech production.  Clopper and Bradlow (2009) demonstrate that native listeners, who rely on differing constellations of overlapping features between speaker groups, are better at identifying speakers’ geographic origin than non-native listeners, who lack sufﬁcient familiarity with variation in their non-native language to ascertain how it may signal membership.  This suggests that experienced listeners exploit combinations and probabilistic co-occurrences of certain features to identify talker identity, rather than invariant sociolinguistic markers.  Moreover, individual talkers may vary their use of ethnically marked features depending on the situation, interlocutor, speech style, and a myriad of other factors (Benor 2010).  The previous studies on ethnolinguistic differences in the production of Canadian English may not have used suitable methodologies to capture subtle or variably realized interethnic linguistic differences.  Perhaps more importantly, it is not known whether listeners actually use t/d deletion or subtle changes in certain Canadian Shift vowels, for example, to index talker ethnicity.  Perceptually-driven studies may be a more sensitive way to uncover ethnolinguistic differences in the absence of timeintensive ethnographic participant observation studies.  Research outside of Canada exploring listeners’ knowledge and stereotypes about ethnolinguistic variation within their communities has demonstrated that listeners do indeed need multiple cues to index speaker ethnicity and also emphasized the role of familiarity.  Szakay (2007) found that listeners from New Zealand could identify the ethnicity of Pakeha (white New Zealanders of European descent) and Maori talkers with very high accuracy, but only when multiple cues were provided.  With only minimal cues, listener performance was not always above chance.  In these more challenging conditions, listeners who were more integrated into the Maori community performed better than listeners with low community integration.  Similarly, in a survey of the literature on listeners’ ability to distinguish African American and European American (White) talkers, Thomas and Reaser (2004) found that familiarity with a particular group enhanced identiﬁcation ability.  Thomas and Reaser also concluded that the cues used by listeners to identify talker ethnicity were inconsistent across studies, again suggesting that listeners do not merely use isolated features to index talker ethnicity.  They also proposed that different listeners might use different cues for ethnic identiﬁcation and emphasized that isolating the cues used by listeners can be methodologically difﬁcult.  The proposal that listeners may use combinations of features to index talker ethnicity was also echoed by Newman and Wu (2011), who investigated listeners’ abilities to identify talker ethnicity in New York City.  Listeners correctly identiﬁed Asian American talkers above chance, but less well than other ethnic groups.  The authors concluded that an Asian American English dialect does exist in New York City, albeit a less salient one than those used by African or Latino Americans.  Newman and Wu’s study, however, was limited by their small sample size.  Similar results were found by Hanna (1997), who found that listeners could distinguish the ethnicity of White and secondgeneration Asian American talkers from the Philadelphia area.  The Asian American talkers came from schools with relatively high percentages (13– 23%) of Asian Americans, which Hanna argues may have facilitated the creation of ethnolinguistic dialects.  Asian American listeners were not signiﬁcantly better at identifying Asian American talkers than White American listeners, which was argued to be due to the high proportion of Asian Americans at the university from which the listeners were recruited.  In other words, familiarity may have again helped listeners.  In summary, previous researchers have drawn different conclusions about the existence of ethnolinguistic variants in Canadian English.  However, international studies focusing on listeners’ perceptions have frequently found robust evidence of ethnolinguistic variation, especially when listeners were more familiar with talkers’ ethnic groups.  Listeners appear to rely on combinations of features to identify talker ethnicity, and perform less well when cues are minimized.  Speakers’ ethnic identities are not only selfconstructions but also projected onto them by society, and the latter may in turn shape self-identiﬁcations of ethnicity.  Our goal is to initiate the documentation and description of ethnolinguistic variation in Vancouver English. 