 The issue of implicit and explicit knowledge and learning mechanisms has attracted attention from many second language acquisition (SLA) researchers because of its theoretical and educational implications (e. g. , Hulstijn, 2005).  To tackle the issues surrounding explicit and implicit knowledge and learning (e. g. , interface issues), the methodological problem of measuring implicit knowledge is crucial (Suzuki & DeKeyser, 2017).  Explicit and implicit knowledge are distinguished based on awareness.  implicit knowledge is deployed without awareness, whereas explicit knowledge requires some level of awareness (DeKeyser, 2003.  Williams, 2009).  Previous SLA studies have shown empirically that explicit and implicit knowledge are distinct constructs that can be measured separately (Bowles, 2011.  R.  Ellis, 2005.  Gutiérrez, 2013.  Zhang, 2015).  A recent study, however, employed a more ﬁnely tuned psycholinguistic technique to examine real-time grammar processing and cast doubt on the validity of existing implicit knowledge measures (Suzuki & DeKeyser, 2015.  Vafaee, Suzuki, & Kachinske, 2017).  The present paper reports a construct validation study of a new battery of ﬁnely tuned tests for implicit knowledge.  the eye-tracking-while-listening task, the wordmonitoring task, and the self-paced reading task.  These real-time comprehension tasks were compared with the existing tasks that have been claimed to measure implicit knowledge, for example, timed grammaticality judgment tests (GJT), which were hypothesized to draw more on automatized explicit knowledge in this study.  PROBLEMS IN PREVIOUS MEASURES OF “IMPLICIT” KNOWLEDGEA seminal study by R.  Ellis (2005, 2009) developed three tests that were hypothesized to measure implicit knowledge.  an oral narrative task, a timed GJT, and an elicited imitation (EI) task.  Since these tasks were performed under time pressure, Ellis claimed that second language (L2) learners are more likely to draw on implicit knowledge.  He conducted a conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) and demonstrated that these time-pressured tests were loaded onto a separate factor from an explicit knowledge factor that untimed tests were loaded onto (i. e. , an untimed GJT and a metalinguistic knowledge test).  This ﬁnding was essentially replicated in subsequent studies with different L2 populations (Ercetin & Alptekin, 2013.  Gutiérrez, 2013.  Sarandi, 2015.  Zhang, 2015) and a heritage learner population (Bowles,The critical methodological factor that differentiated “implicit” knowledge from “explicit” knowledge in those studies was imposing time pressure on the language tests.  however, time pressure cannot necessarily limit access to explicit knowledge enough to ensure that implicit knowledge is drawn upon (DeKeyser, 2003.  Suzuki & DeKeyser, 2015.  Vafaee et al. , 2017).  Proﬁcient L2 learners may still access explicit knowledge with awareness even if the execution is rapid (i. e. , automatized explicit knowledge), which is distinguished from the use of linguistic knowledge without awareness (i. e. , implicit knowledge).  In other words, both implicit knowledge and automatized explicit knowledge are accessed quickly, but they are distinguished based on the awareness criterion.  Highly automatized knowledge is conscious knowledge that one can draw on quickly.  It is functionally equivalent to implicit knowledge in the sense that it is not easy to distinguish behaviorally (and impossible to distinguish in mundane language use), but it remains knowledge that one is aware of, and awareness is the deﬁning criterion of explicit knowledge.  In cognitive psychology, automaticity (i. e. , the end point of automatization) is often characterized as lack of awareness (e. g. , Jacoby, 1991.  Posner & Snyder, 1975).  However, automatization is a long process, and even highly automatized skills do not always become 100% automatic, particularly with complex skills like L2 learning.  Automatization of explicit knowledge should be regarded as a gradual development, not an all or nothing phenomenon (DeKeyser, 2015).  In the current paper, automatized explicit knowledge is thus deﬁned as a body of conscious linguistic knowledge including different levels of automatization.  An attempt is made to measure partially (not fully) automatized linguistic knowledge with a conscious correlate, which can be theoretically distinguishable from implicit knowledge.  A recent study provided evidence that it is possible to devise linguistic tasks that can draw upon implicit knowledge separately from automatized explicit knowledge (Suzuki & DeKeyser, 2015).  Suzuki and DeKeyser (2015) demonstrated that the EI task, which was the best measure of implicit knowledge in the test battery of Ellis’ (2009) study, did not measure implicit knowledge but drew on automatized explicit knowledge.  Even though time pressure was imposed and attention was directed to meaning during the EI task, there appeared to be some room for accessing automatized explicit knowledge for advanced L2 learners.  Since EI tasks direct learners’ attention to meaning, it is certainly a better test of implicit knowledge than form-focused tasks like the timed GJTs.  These timed GJTs should be deemed a measure of automatized explicit knowledge because they always require learners to pay attention to forms, which inevitably raises awareness of one’s linguistic knowledge (Vafaee et al. , 2017).  Of course, the level of awareness that each test taker brings to the task may vary depending on his/her background.  For instance, native speakers and some L2 learners (e. g. , heritage learners) with little experience of learning of a L2 through formal instruction, who presumably possess little explicit knowledge, need to draw on implicit knowledge to perform a GJT, regardless of its being timed or untimed.  In contrast, learners with formal instruction may tend to recourse to, or at least attempt to draw on, automatized explicit knowledge.  The present study focuses on L2 learners with some formal instruction and hypothesizes that timed GJTs primarily draw on automatized explicit knowledge forTHEORETICAL IMPORTANCE FOR DISTINGUISHING BETWEEN IMPLICIT KNOWLEDGE AND AUTOMATIZED EXPLICIT KNOWLEDGE.  The distinction between automatized explicit knowledge and implicit knowledge in L2 learners has not been thoroughly researched.  Differentiating linguistic knowledge that has no conscious correlate (implicit) from that which involves consciousness (explicit) but has been automatized bears important implications at many levels.  From an applied pedagogical perspective, the distinction may be trivial practically (see further discussions in DeKeyser, 2015.  Spada, 2015).  From a theoretical point of view, however, the distinction is indispensable for tackling two related issues in explicit and implicit learning.  The ﬁrst problem concerns the nature of linguistic knowledge types that L2 learners possess.  By postulating automatized explicit knowledge in addition to implicit and (nonautomatized or less automatized) explicit knowledge, it allows for assessing L2 ability through more scrutinized constructs.  For instance, it is an empirical question of to what extent L2 proﬁciency (e. g. , measured by standardized tests) can be explained by implicit knowledge, automatized explicit knowledge, and less automatized or nonautomatized explicit knowledge (e. g. , Elder & Ellis, 2009).  A more important point is that accurate identiﬁcation/assessment of distinct types of linguistic knowledge provides essential insight into the second problem, that is, uncovering L2 learning processes.  One of the central issues in the SLA ﬁeld is how explicit/implicit learning leads to the acquisition of implicit knowledge.  the interface issue.  Many researchers express different positions as to whether explicit knowledge facilitates the acquisition of implicit knowledge (DeKeyser, 2015.  N.  C.  Ellis, 2005.  Ellis, 2008.  Hulstijn, 2002.  Krashen, 1985.  McLaughlin, 1987.  Paradis, 2009).  The theoretical distinction between automatized explicit knowledge and implicit knowledge, along with valid measurements for them, can advance our understanding of the interface issues in at least two related areas.  Explicit learning processes can be examined in more depth as L2 learning results in a large variability in the degree of automatization in L2 knowledge (e. g. , DeKeyser, 1997, 2015).  Implicit learning processes can be examined more closely in relation to different types of explicit knowledge.  A certain group of L2 learners may ﬁrst engage in explicit learning and succeed in attaining automaticity.  they may utilize automatized explicit knowledge to facilitate the acquisition of implicit knowledge (Suzuki & DeKeyser, 2017).  In contrast, a different type of L2 learner possesses explicit knowledge, a large part of which is not automatized at all.  these learners may have to deploy implicit learning mechanisms in different ways from the ﬁrst group.  It is also possible that the usefulness of explicit knowledge for implicit learning varies depending on whether explicit knowledge is automatized or not.  The clearer operationalization and identiﬁcation of the constructs are crucial in revealing learning processes of different L2 learner populations through the lens of explicit and implicit learning.  <Middle> NEW MEASURES OF IMPLICIT KNOWLEDGE.  REAL-TIME COMPREHENSION TESTS.  Following Suzuki and DeKeyser (2015), the current study proposes that implicit knowledge is drawn upon when test takers register1 speciﬁc grammatical structures for real-time comprehension.  Examining real-time grammar processing allows us to capture whether learners can deploy their linguistic knowledge with very little lag from the input.  they are very unlikely to apply linguistic knowledge consciously (Andringa & Curcic, 2015.  Leung & Williams, 2012.  Paradis, 2009.  Suzuki & DeKeyser, 2015).  Only implicit knowledge makes it possible to operate at almost the exact time of occurrence of targeted grammatical structures.  More important, measures of implicit knowledge should direct test takers’ attention primarily to meaning so that they do not raise awareness about grammatical structures to be targeted.  While form-focused tasks are direct measures of grammatical knowledge, implicit knowledge tests are characterized as indirect measures.  In what follows, I will introduce three psycholinguistic measures that capture real-time comprehension of grammatical structures, requiring no grammatical judgments on the stimulus sentences.  I will ﬁrst discuss reaction-time measures with focus on a word-monitoring task and a self-paced reading task.  After that, I will introduce a still newer method in the L2 ﬁeld, an eye-tracking while-listening task (i. e. , visual-world task).  An increasing interest in a psycholinguistic approach to SLA has developed over the decades, leading to an increasing use of reaction time (RT) to examine online sentence processing in L2 (for a review, see Jiang, 2011).  Representative tasks include the word-monitoring task (Granena, 2013. 