INTRODUCTION.  In his bestseller The World is Flat, Friedman (2007) portrays a world in which technological changes have ‘ﬂattened the playing ﬁeld’ by equalising opportunities among individuals.  Long before this metaphor of ﬂatness was made popular in the understanding of globalisation, what might be referred to as a ‘ﬂat earth’ approach has dominated the discourse of academic disciplines on spatial geographies as in geopolitics, urban design and critical urban research.  It is therefore unsurprising that this discursive ﬂattening is also found in other academic domains where landscape is a prime concern, as in research on linguistic landscapes, and more generally, on semiotic landscapes.  The persistent neglect of the vertical landscape in ‘an overly ﬂat discourse’ (Graham and Hewitt 2012.  72) as seen in these disciplines, however, is at odds with the human spatial experience, which is essentially three-dimensional and volumetric.  Furthermore, such neglect overlooks the fact that high-rise architecture has become an iconic and ubiquitous feature in contemporary cityscapes in an increasingly urbanised world.  Of course, tall buildings are nothing new.  By the late nineteenth century, multi-storey structures were already in place, at least since the Home Insurance Building in Chicago – often regarded as the world’s ﬁrst modern skyscraper – was completed in 1885.  However, it was not until the last decade or so, when computing power brought about major technological advances in architecture and engineering, that the construction of supertall buildings of theoretically unlimited heights became possible (Al-Kodmany 2011).  While it remains to be seen whether supertall buildings will become the future architectural norm, it is generally expected that skyscrapers will continue to grow in number, scale and height.  A call for the study and theorisation of verticality in landscape-related research is therefore not only essential but pressing.  In this regard, nowhere in the world is a more ﬁtting research site for understanding the vertical landscape than Hong Kong.  Situated at the southeastern tip of China, Hong Kong is characterised by a unique landscape combining hilly terrain with a deep harbour.  Of the 1105 square km of total land area (Hong Kong Lands Department 2014), approximately 45 percent possesses an elevation of at least 100 metres above sea level. 2 The bulk of this rugged landscape is thus composed of steep slopes, rendering it relatively unsuitable for development.  Only about a quarter of the land is currently developed for residential, commercial, industrial and other urban uses.  The remaining three quarters is mainly composed of woodland, grassland and wetland which are scattered across the territory (Hong Kong Planning Department 2014).  With a population of over seven million people (Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department 2014), Hong Kong is the eighth most densely populated urban area in the world (Demographia 2015.  108).  Highrise and high-density buildings are therefore a direct response to the large population in a small city of distinct topography.  This is unlike in Dubai, for instance, where the aim of vertical expansion is not to address land-shortage problems but to showcase the city’s wealth and to mark its global position (AlKodmany 2011).  Hong Kong is unique in terms of both its scale and pattern of verticality.  Among the Paciﬁc Rim regions, Hong Kong was the ﬁrst to begin the development of tall buildings in the 1970s.  In less than half a century, Hong Kong has become the city with the highest number of skyscrapers in the world, surpassing New York and Dubai (The Skyscraper Center 2015).  Almost 90 percent of the city’s population live in high-rise buildings (Wang and Lau 2013).  Compared with New York and Chicago which are both archetypal vertical cities with skyscrapers highly concentrated at the core, Hong Kong is exceptional in the sense that verticality is not only found at the centre but also across the whole city (Chau 2011).  Hong Kong, on several counts, can hence be regarded as the world’s most vertical city, making it an ideal location for researching the vertical dimension of linguistic landscapes.  RESEARCHING THE DISCURSIVE AND MATERIAL LANDSCAPES.  Landscape-related research in linguistics and semiotics primarily concerns the ways in which the physical landscape is deﬁned and communicated discursively in space through the use of language and other semiotic resources.  Such research has long been strongly oriented to the study of public spaces in urban contexts.  This is evident, for example, in the ﬁrst deﬁnition of the term linguistic landscape by Landry and Bourhis (1997.  25), which focused on such urban signage as ‘advertising billboards’ and ‘commercial shop signs’.  Similarly, when conceptualising the notion semiotic landscape, Jaworski and Thurlow (2010.  2) emphasised how language, as one of the available semiotic resources, interacts with such urban modalities as ‘architecture and the built environment’, in deﬁning a place.  Given the overwhelming majority of research in linguistic and semiotic landscapes in urban areas, it has been suggested that cityscape might be a better word for the subject under investigation (see, for example, Gorter 2006.  Spolsky 2009).  Despite this strong orientation to the study of the urban linguistic and semiotic landscapes, there has been a curious absence of scholarly attention to verticality.  Previous studies thus far have mainly dealt with signs at street level, overlooking the relationship between signs and skyscrapers or underground railways, structures which increasingly characterise cities and urban life.  Studies of the linguistic and semiotic landscapes of Hong Kong are no exception.  Largely conceptualising the city as a horizontal surface, these studies have explored the interrelationship between particular regional areas of Hong Kong and patterns of signage, while addressing such issues as multilingualism, language proﬁciency and post-colonialism.  In this former colony of Britain, Chinese and English remain the ofﬁcial languages after its handover to China in 1997.  The language policy of the Hong Kong government is to promote ‘biliteracy and trilingualism’ amongst the population.  Cantonese is the mother tongue or usual language of an overwhelming majority (88–90%) of the predominantly ethnic Chinese population, while Mandarin has recently overtaken English as the second most commonly spoken language (48% vs.  46%) (Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department 2011, 2016).  A recent linguistic survey showed an increasing trilingualism amongst younger speakers in the city (Bacon-Shone, Bolton and Luke 2015).  In addition, census data shows that Hong Kong is home to twenty-four minority languages, each spoken by at least one thousand residents.  These include Filipino, Indonesian, and other Asian languages (Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department 2016).  The extent of multilingualism in the horizontal landscape of the city is hence a common research theme.  In a study of signs on residential buildings in Hong Kong, for example, Jaworski and Yeung (2010) showed the differences in semiotic choices as displayed in property-name signs among three broad geographical areas of varying degrees of afﬂuence.  In the working-class neighbourhood, there were more monolingual Chinese signs when compared with the more afﬂuent areas, and signs were more functional in nature.  By contrast, signs from the most privileged neighbourhood were more likely to be monolingual in English and were more decorative in nature, invoking a sense of grandeur.  Similar differences were also found in Finzel (2012), who studied the linkage between the language choice of shop signs and the language proﬁciency of shopkeepers in two geographical areas of Hong Kong.  It was found that shops in the old working-class district had more monolingual Chinese signs and had staff who spoke little English.  In the middle-class district, more monolingual English signs were found and the employees were able to converse in English at the shops.  These ﬁndings indicate that the horizontal linguistic landscape of Hong Kong, speciﬁcally, the language choice on signs, is sensitive to the socioeconomic background of the local residents.  Focusing more on the postcolonial inﬂuence from mainland China on the linguistic landscape of the city after the change of sovereignty, Lai (2013) examined signage at four geographical sites in Hong Kong with differing proximity to the border with mainland China.  It was found that the closer the site was to the border, the more frequent was the use of simpliﬁed Chinese on signs.  As simpliﬁed Chinese is the form of written Chinese used in mainland China but not in Hong Kong, its presence on signs nearer the border may signal the impact of ‘mainlandisation’.  The linguistic divide at this intranational border is also the topic of interest in Danielewicz-Betz and Graddol (2014) and Graddol and Danielewicz-Betz (2015), who found that Hong Kong and Shenzhen, its closest neighbour across the border, were distinct in their language landscapes in terms of romanisation, lexical choice and preference for the exonormative variety of English.  Traditional Chinese, simpliﬁed Chinese and English can thus each be seen to have a distinct visual identity in the city.  Following Scollon and Scollon (2003.  xii), we consider emplacement, i. e.  ‘the physical location of language in the world’, to be central to the understanding of any sign.  We further argue that the meaning of a sign is dependent not only upon where it is placed horizontally but also, equally importantly, where it is placed vertically.  The inclusion of this missing z-coordinate on the map of landscape research thus presents a crucial yet long overdue perspective, allowing the landscape to be seen in full in three-dimensional space.  It is with this focus that we now turn to studies of the material landscape to see how insights into verticality from such disciplines as architecture, geography and urban studies can inform a more comprehensive understanding of the discursive landscape.  Partly overlapping with the discursive landscape, the material landscape mainly concerns the ways in which the physical landscape is defined and communicated materially in space through the use of architectural and other physical forms.  Two material design features peculiar to the vertical landscape of Hong Kong are of particular relevance here.  the multiple intensive land use (MILU) model and the podiumIn response to the continuous arrival of immigrants from mainland China since the early 1960s and the economic boom in the 70s and 80s, the government in Hong Kong introduced a Buildings Ordinance in 1970 to permit the design and construction of tall buildings for mixed use.  This urban development policy resulted in low-rise shop-houses giving way to high-rise buildings, which forever changed the skyline of Hong Kong.  Over the years, new building regulations have been enforced not only to increase the overall floor-to-area ratio of such mixed-use buildings but also the non-domestic proportion, allowing developers to enlarge the retail floor area at the lower end of a building for higher rental returns.  Since then, Hong Kong has seen the proliferation of increasingly multi-functional high-density skyscrapers, with an oversized podium as a characteristic, if not defining, feature.  In these so-called composite developments, offices or residential apartments are housed together with facilities for other uses within one single tower block.  The most common uses identified in representative MILU projects in the city are residential, commercial, recreational, community facilities and transport facilities (Lau, Giridharan and Ganesan 2005).  A mixed-use tower in Hong Kong is thus in essence a microcosm of the city, a synthesis of public and private spaces for different social practices performed by a range of social actors in one vertical structure.  In this respect, the now ubiquitous podium form in these MILU projects has been hailed as a form of public space with social significance (Shelton, Karakiewicz and Kvan 2011).  Elevated above the ground, the podium is a horizontal transfer structure at the base of a skyscraper, whose orientation and width differ from that of the skyscraper’s tower (Skyscraper Dictionary 2013–2014).  As a raised platform often encompassing several floors to support the weight of the tower above, the podium regularly serves the important function of demarcating public and private spaces.  Under the roof of the podium, commercial and transport facilities such as car parks, transport interchanges and shopping arcades are commonly found.  Above the deck rise the stacks of commercial or residential towers.  In the case of the latter, the podium terrace is reserved for recreational and communal facilities including landscaped gardens, playgrounds and sports amenities, all of which are often used exclusively by the gated communities of residents living in the towers sitting atop the podium.  These two interrelated design features characterising much of the vertical dimension of the contemporary material landscape of Hong Kong have profound implications for its discursive landscape.  In the discussion which follows, we explore the means and forms in which the vertical landscape can be visually deﬁned and communicated by focusing on one of the most recent and representative composite urban projects at the business and ﬁnance hub of Hong Kong, namely the megastructure of the International Finance Centre. 