INTRODUCTION.  There is growing research into relatively privileged forms of migration, such as that termed lifestyle migration.  a concept that frames such movements in terms of choice and possibility rather than necessity, and which acknowledges the role played by structural and economic conditions (Benson 2016).  Such studies have utilised migrant narratives to understand how the speakers make sense of their lives within that particular sociocultural context.  While other forms of migration, such as labour movements, have undergone analysis of positioning in interaction (De Fina 2006), there has been little attention paid towards interactive positioning in lifestyle migration contexts.  By integrating two datasets of discourse – one online and one face to face – this paper presents a grounded interpretation of how a British migrant couple in France jointly construct a narrative world that is both framed and disrupted by prevailing ideologies.  To date, lifestyle migration researchers are at work in a range of global contexts and migrant nationalities, including studies of British migration to destinations such as Spain (O’Reilly 2012), Portugal (Torkington 2015) and France (Benson 2011).  Within the British contexts there is some coherence across common themes of a search for a better life abroad, conceptualising a postmodern escape to a simpler life that nevertheless perceives such migration as a purchasable, consumption-driven commodity.  Yet we should be wary of viewing such migration unproblematically as privileged.  some migrants articulate the move in terms of constraint, particularly when the region has been selected due to lower property prices (Lawson 2016).  Migrants can also be vulnerable to economic and political developments, such as the uncertainty following the 2016 Brexit vote for the U. K.  to leave the European Union (EU).  This intersection of lifestyle and economic factors has led to criticism of the term lifestyle migration as imprecise (Huete, Mantecon and Estevez 2013), since it hinders consistent deﬁnitions.  Yet with such a varied array of lifestyle migration contexts, we might question whether precision is an essential component of the overall concept. 