I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Children’s interpretation of contrast-marking prosody Although many aspects of language have been mastered by the age of five or six, other aspects, such as pragmatic understanding of the meaning of intonational contours, have longer developmental trajectories.  Many researchers have argued that young children do not rely on intonation in inferring the speaker’s pragmatic intention, affect, or emotional state (e. g.  Aguert, Laval, Le Bigot & Bernicot, .  Capelli, Nakagawa & Madden, .  Cruttenden, .  Cutler & Swinney, .  Hornby & Hass, .  Morton & Trehub, .  Quam & Swingley, .  Solan, .  Van Der Meulen, Janssen & Den Os, .  Wells, Peppe & Goulandris, .  Winner & Leekam, ).  Moreover, the ability to interpret an intonation contour that signals contrast is said to develop late, after age six, and slowly (Ito, Bibyk, Wagner & Speer, .  Ito, Jincho, Minai, Yamane & Mazuka, .  Speer & Ito, ).  For example, Cruttenden () tested British English-speaking ten-year-olds and adults to determine whether they could reliably identify the referents of utterances such as those in (a) and (b), given a choice of three pictured referents []–[].  () a.  It’s a very nice garden.  [fall–rise] b.  It’s a very nice garden. a nice garden but a house falling down a garden and a house, both very nice a garden overgrown but a very nice house (a) has the fall–rise pitch accent on the word garden, which results in a slight rise at the final position of the sentence.  This is typically associated with reservation (Cruttenden’s [] term) or contrast in meaning.  This reservation is expected to match the picture in [], in which the nice garden is contrasted with the not-nice house.  (b), however, does not convey such a contrast and, hence, could describe [] or [].  Cruttenden found that % of the adult listeners chose picture [] for (a) but that only % of the ten-year-olds did so.  % of them chose [] instead.  The majority in both groups consistently selected [] when they heard (b).  These results and those of other studies strongly suggest that comprehension of the contrast-marking function of an intonation contour has yet to be acquired by ten-year-olds (see also Cutler & Swinney, .  Speer & Ito, ).  Children’s difficulty in understanding intonation contours cannot be attributed solely to a limited ability to PERCEIVE pitch contours.  Much younger children are acutely sensitive to prosodic information in the input (e. g.  Fernald .  Morgan & Demuth, .  Sakkalou & Gattis, ).  In addition, in a few limited domains, children under six years of age do show some understanding of pragmatic functions marked by intonation contour (e. g.  Armstrong, .  Grassmann & Tomasello, , .  Sekerina & Trueswell, ), and they PRODUCE distinct contours that depend on the pragmatic function of their utterance (Cutler & Swinney, .  Hornby & Hass.  .  Ito, .  Thorson & Morgan, .  Wells et al. , .  Wieman, ).  At the same time, young children appear to be insensitive to intonational meanings in situations in which adult listeners derive specific pragmatic inferences effortlessly.  This raises the question.  What causes these young children difficulty.  To investigate the development of the ability to interpret intonational meanings, consider example () again.  Adult-like interpretation of intonational meanings involves the following three steps (Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg, ).  First, listeners need to identify a particular utterance as a variant of (a) or (b).  Second, they need to remember that an intonation contour such as (a) is typically associated with the speaker’s highlighting a contextual contrast.  Third, they reason about why the speaker used a particular intonation in context in arriving at a specific interpretation of the target utterance (e. g.  [It’s a very nice garden, but the house is not as nice]).  In particular, this process requires listeners to derive a contextually plausible alternative expression (namely, what the speaker could have said, e. g.  (a) vs.  (b)) and make inferences about why the speaker chose a particular expression (Grice, ).  These three steps are not necessarily acquired in order, and their developmental trajectories are most likely intertwined.  Nonetheless, the separation of intonation interpretation into these three steps is useful, as each one taps a different aspect of children’s linguistic knowledge.  The first step depends on representations of meaningful intonational contours in English, as well as cognitive and attentional resources, to process a sequence of speech as it unfolds (Ito et al. , .  Speer & Ito, ).  The second includes knowledge specific to English intonational contours, as languages differ in how much of the speaker’s pragmatic intention is conveyed prosodically and how this is accomplished (see Büring & Gutiérrez-Bravo, .  Ladd, .  Jun, , .  Vallduví, ).  The third step requires the ability to make use of contextual information to derive a conversational implicature.  Researchers have argued that preschoolers lag behind adults in using contextual information to constrain possible interpretations of an utterance (Snedeker & Trueswell, ).  Indeed, children’s intonational interpretations could differ from those of adults in any one of these steps and so result in difficulty in arriving at the intonational meaning intended.  Two important questions here are.  Which step constitutes an obstacle.  and How do children achieve adult-like interpretations.  To answer these questions, we first need to take a brief look at another domain of development with a similarly late, and protracted, development in children.  scalar implicature.  Preschoolers typically fail to derive scalar implicatures based on quantifiers (e. g.  none, some, and all) or logical words such as and vs.  or (e. g.  Chierchia, Crain, Guasti, Gualmini & Meroni, .  Musolino, .  Musolino & Lidz, .  Noveck, .  Papafragou, .  Papafragou & Musolino, .  Papafragou & Tantalou, ).  Their difficulty could be due to the level of their general processing capacity, language-specific lexical knowledge (including knowledge about relevant scales), or pragmatic ability in deriving the appropriate implicatures.  One method for sorting out these components is to provide extra scaffolding for one component and to determine whether this improves children’s performance.  Recent studies have shown that, with such an approach, the difficulty that children have with scalar implicature often lies in identifying a relevant scale.  In fact, preschoolers can manage pragmatic inferences when they are shown visually represented ad-hoc scales (Stiller, Goodman & Frank, ), familiar scales such as numbers, or even explicit descriptions.  So, when shown a picture of three animals sleeping, four-year-olds correctly reject Only the cat and the cow are sleeping (Barner, Brooks & Bale, ).  The availability of contrasting prenominal adjectives also helps children to make contrastive inferences (Horowitz & Frank, , ).  Together, these results support the hypothesis that children’s difficulty with scalar implicature lies in their limited ability to call to mind relevant alternatives in response to words such as some, rather than in their cognitive ability to compute contextually enriched pragmatic meanings.  If we apply the same logic to the interpretation of intonational contours, we can test whether preschoolers understand a contrastive intonation contour better, as in (a), when there is a linguistic alternative available in the same context.  In other words, the non-adult-like performance observed in earlier research may stem from children’s difficulty in arriving at relevant alternatives based on an intonational cue alone.  We define an alternative as an expression that is (a) lexically, syntactically, or prosodically different from a target utterance, and (b) is strongly linked to one of the possible meanings that the speaker could have expressed in that context.  If a likely alternative expression is explicit in context, preschoolers may be able to bootstrap their inference by reasoning about why the speaker used one particular expression and not another.  This type of reasoning follows from adherence to the principle of contrast (Clark, ), known for its facilitative roles in the early stages of children’s word learning.  The current study was designed to test this prediction in the domain of intonational meanings.  We also test an extended version of this prediction.  We asked.  If the availability of alternatives facilitates children’s contextual inferences, does successful comprehension contribute to the LEARNING of an intonational meaning.  By learning, we mean acquisition of the ability to identify an intended meaning based on a particular prosodic contour, even in the absence of an explicit alternative.  Contextually derived meanings may be short-lived or strongly tied to a particular setting, and thus unlikely to generalize across speakers and contexts (e. g.  Carey, .  Goodman, McDonough & Brown, .  Horst & Samuelson, .  Mervis & Bertrand, .  Wilkinson & Mazzitelli, ).  Alternatively, young children could learn to associate a particular intonation contour with some pragmatic meaning through contextually supported inferences.  In what follows, we present findings from three studies of four-year-olds.  We show that these children succeed in the appropriate pragmatic interpretation of contrast-marking intonation contours when they can leverage their interpretations against alternatives in context.  We also show, in a two-day-long study, that contextually leveraged inferences generalize across speakers and contexts, potentially contributing to longer-term acquisition of intonational meanings.  A case in point.  “It looks like an X”.  The current study focuses on the construction It looks like an X (e. g.  It looks like a zebra).  (We use italics for example words or sentences abstracted away from acoustic detail, e. g.  It is raining outside can be said as “It’s RAINING outside!”, “It IS raining outside!”, and other variations.  We use double-quotation marks for quoted speech, with phonetic and prosodic specification.  capital letters for prosodic emphasis.  and square brackets [ ] for intended interpretations. ) Depending on the listener’s construal of the intonation contour, this construction can convey either an affirmative ‘hint’ (e. g.  [(It looks like a zebra) and I think it is one]) or, with a different contour, a negative ‘warning’ (e. g.  [(It looks like a zebra) but it actually isn’t one]) (Kurumada, Brown & Tanenhaus, , submitted.  Kurumada, Brown, Bibyk, Pontillo & Tanenhaus, ).  Both interpretations are attested in spontaneous conversations between adults and children.  Hansen and Markman (), in their analysis of language uses pertinent to the appearance/reality distinction, found examples of look(s) like in  recording sessions from eight children between .  and .  and their parents (in , turns).  Of these,  instances (%, virtually all from adults) were used to indicate the identity of the object (e. g.  Child.  What’s that.  – Adult.  It looks like a bottle opener).  and  (%, again, adult uses mainly) were used to refer to the similarity in appearance of the referents mentioned (e. g.  Adult.  Yeah, that rock looks like a beehive).  By four years of age, then, children clearly have been exposed to instances of the It looks like an X construction, with an affirmative (It is an X) and comparative interpretations in context, usually offered in response to children’s What’s that questions.  Nevertheless, Hansen and Markman’s study did not examine the prosodic features of utterances, and thus does not provide any information on how often adults contradict the child’s inappropriate reference by means of “It LOOKS like X (but it isn’t one). ” Other researchers have documented adult speakers’ uses of looks like as well as is like to convey one of two different speaker intentions marked by differences in prosodic contour (Clark & Wong, ).  In () below, the adult speaker (Karen) uses They look like cows to me as a hint to categorize the referents as cows.  In (), however, Adam’s mother uses It’s like to give feedback on an erroneous word–object mapping, with an alert or warning.  Clark and Wong suggested that the lengthened vowel (here transcribed as ‘li. . ke’) emphasizes this function of the utterance by highlighting the reading [It is like a rope but it’s actually not a rope].  () Abe (. ·.  Kuczaj . , from Clark and Wong (), Karen is an adult) ABE.  What’s those.  KAREN.  What do they look like.  ABE.  I don’t know.  KAREN.  They look like cows to me, don’t they look like cows() Adam (. . l.  Brown/Adam . , from Clark and Wong () ADAM.  What kind o(f) rope is dat.  MOTHER.  It’s not a rope.  It’s li. . ke a rope.  It’s a cord.  Figure  provides intonational contours that a native speaker of American English uses when asked to express these two meanings.  In THE NOUN-FOCUS PROSODY (on the left), the sentence bears a canonical accent placement, with sentential stress on the last constituent (i. e.  X in It looks like an X), and the overall pitch contour ends with a low–falling boundary tone.  We follow the ToBI convention, in which L and H to represent a low tone and a high tone respectively, and % indicates an utterance-final boundary tone (Beckman & Ayers, .  Beckman, Hirschberg & Shattuck-Hufnagel, .  Silverman et al. , ).  An asterisk (*) means that the tone is aligned with a pitch accent.  The noun-focus prosody is therefore annotated as a contour with an H* on the final noun followed by a falling boundary tone L-L%.  This pattern typically evokes the affirmative interpretation (i. e.  [It looks like an X and it is one]) usually produced by adults to provide a hint as to the identity of the referent.  In THE VERB-FOCUS PROSODY (on the right), the vowel in the verb looks is lengthened and emphasized with a contrastive accent (L + H*), and the sentence typically ends with a rising, L-H%, boundary tone.  This pattern biases individuals’ interpretation toward the negative interpretation (i. e.  [It looks like an X but it is not one]).  This provides a warning.  Studies with adult speakers of English corroborate this distinction between hint and warning (Kurumada et al. , , submitted.  Kurumada et al. , ).  Although adult judgments are not always categorical and can be modulated by contextual factors, such as the preceding utterance, an expected level of speaker expertise, and distributional information about the speaker’s prosodic production, they reliably interpret these contours as [It is an X] (hint) and [It is not an X] (warning) (see Kurumada et al. , ).  With this construction, we ask whether four-year-olds can make a contrastive inference based on prosodic information.  To call to mind that “it LOOKS like an X .  .  .  ” (verb-focus prosody) means [It is not an X], one needs to make inferences based on two prosodic representations.  a fall–rise pitch accent (L + H*) and a rising boundary tone (L-H%).  The L +H* accent on the verb evokes a set of alternatives, in this case, any alternative predicates, including the semantically stronger It is an X.  The utterance-final boundary tone signals that the propositional content is incomplete, which invites an additional inference from the listener (e. g.  [.  .  .  but it is actually something else]).  This is similar to the inference expected in (a), “It’s a very nice garden .  .  . ” [but the house is not nice] (Cruttenden, ).  In Experiments –, we test whether four-year-olds can, in fact, engage in such an inference if they have access to an alternative expression (e. g.  “It is an X” vs.  “It LOOKS like an X .  .  . ”).  In an everyday conversational context, as in () and () above, adult speakers tend to provide alternative expressions through rephrasing (e. g.  “It’s not a rope”.  “It’s like a rope”.  “It’s a cord”).  We predict that young children will succeed in making a contrastive inference from “It LOOKS like an X” if they receive such information in context.  We then ask whether such contextually supported inferences can be extended to understanding the same intonation contour when an alternative structure is not present.  We end with a discussion of the role of such contextual inferences in intonational development.  <Middle> EXPERIMENT . Participants.  We recruited and tested twelve children who were acquiring English as their first language (five girls, seven boys.  mean age . , age range . –. ) at a nursery school in Stanford, California.  We also collected data from twenty-four adults on-line, using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service (https. //www. mturk. com/mturk/).  Adult participants were all selfidentified as native speakers of American English who currently resided in the United States.  Data from three adult participants were excluded because their participation time was two standard deviations below the mean.  Adults were paid $ to participate in this task.  Stimuli.  First, we embedded sixteen high-frequency animal names in the sentence frame It looks like an X (e. g.  It looks like a zebra).  All the items were recorded twice by a female native speaker of American English.  once with noun-focus prosody (e. g.  “It looks like a ZEBRA!”) and once with verb-focus prosody (e. g.  “It LOOKS like a zebra .  .  . ”).  We created two experimental lists and counterbalanced the stimuli across these two lists.  items pronounced with noun-focus prosody in List one had verb-focus prosody in List two, and vice versa.  The mean duration (in milliseconds) and fundamental frequency of the words used (i. e.  it, looks, like, a, noun) are summarized in Table  and Figure .  We chose sixteen animal pictures to visually represent the animal terms.  We then chose sixteen more animal pictures to form pairs whereby the animals resembled each other perceptually (e. g.  a zebra and an okapi.  Figure ).  In each pair, the target named in the input sentence (e. g.  It looks like a zebra) was the more frequent of the two and was expected to be more familiar to the children who were being tested.  Hereafter, the target named in a sentence (e. g.  a zebra) is referred to as the animal MENTIONED, and the paired animal (e. g.  an okapi) is the UNMENTIONED animal.  The animals in each pair served as target referents for one or the other of the two prosodic contours used in the task (e. g.  a zebra as the target referent for “It looks like a ZEBRA” [and it is one] and an okapi for “It LOOKS like a zebra .  .  . ” [but it’s not one]).  Why did we use this asymmetry in the familiarity of the two items in each pair.  For our study, we needed to ensure that, for each pair, children were more familiar with the animal mentioned than with the unmentioned animal.  If the children were equally familiar with both animals, e. g.  horse and zebra, no adult speaker would say, “It LOOKS like a zebra .  .  . ” to refer to a horse.  instead, the speaker would simply say, “It’s a horse”.  In other words, for the verb-focus prosody to be used felicitously, one animal has to be unfamiliar and less likely to be referred to by name.  To make sure that preschoolers registered this asymmetry, we did two surveys.  The first one was an informal interview, for which we showed all the depictions of animals to eight children and had them name them one by one.  Most could name all the mentioned animals (e. g.  horse, zebra, elephant) or else recognized the names once the adult interviewer mentioned them (e. g.  beetle, tadpole).  At the same time, none of the children could correctly name all the unmentioned animals (e. g.  okapi, tapir, bison).  These children did not participate in the actual experiment.  We also showed all of the stimuli to the teachers at the nursery school to confirm that the unmentioned animals were, indeed, less familiar to the children tested.  In the second survey, we checked that preschoolers could correctly associate a given mentioned name (e. g.  zebra) to a target picture when presented with the two options of zebra and okapi.  We did this to reject the possibility that children would accept both pictures (a zebra and an okapi) as equally good referents for the word used in an instruction (e. g.  It looks like a zebra).  We showed our picture pairs to five four-year-olds, who did not participate in the experiments, and asked them to point to the picture that matched best with the name of the animal.  They answered correctly, e. g.  choosing a zebra over an okapi almost all the time (%).  This suggests that four-year-olds indeed recognized one picture in each pair as a better referential fit for the noun mentioned.  This licensed adult uses of “it LOOKS like an X .  .  . ” in referring to the unfamiliar item in each pair.  The task.  The experiment took place in a quiet room with a low table and child-sized chairs.  The experimenter sat across from the child and placed experimental equipment (a puppet, a box, and a file binder displaying all the two choice options) on the table.  Participants took part in a two-alternative forced-choice task with an experimenter who was a native speaker of American English.  The task comprised sixteen trials (two practice trials and fourteen critical trials) and lasted approximately  minutes.  The child participant was first introduced to the puppet named Sally.  A mini portable speaker was attached to the puppet as a means to play the audio stimuli, and the experimenter who manipulated the puppet controlled the audio stimuli with a small mp player.  Children first took part in a picture-naming task, for which they labeled eight animals, one by one (Picture-naming Task ).  These animals were later used as ‘mentioned’ animals in the immediately following block of the guessing game (Guessing-game Phase ).  Then the child and the puppet repeated the procedure with eight more critical items.  Children were randomly assigned to one of two item lists with different presentation orders of the animal pairs.  In the guessing game, children were first presented with a box and told that it contained pictures of many different animals.  In each trial, the child was shown two pictures – the target and a distractor (e. g.  a zebra [mentioned] versus an okapi [unmentioned]), as shown in Figure .  The pictures were presented in a red frame (left) and a blue frame (right), and the location of the mentioned and the unmentioned pictures was counterbalanced across items.  The puppet was allowed to peek inside the box and to give the child a clue in the form of “It looks like an X” vs.  “It LOOKS like an X .  .  . ”.  The experimenter controlled the puppet’s movements so that there was no other extralinguistic cue (such as the puppet’s gesture or gaze direction) for the child.  Following the puppet’s utterance, the child was asked to point to the picture of whichever animal was hidden inside the box.  When the child’s point was ambiguous, the experimenter followed up and asked, “Is it the one in the red box or the blue box. ” until the child provided a clear verbal or non-verbal response.  After the child’s response, the experimenter took a picture card from the box, showed it to the child, and said, “Oh, it was this one!” This served as feedback about which animal the puppet-speaker had intended to identify.  All sessions were recorded on a camcorder for later review and coding.  Two coders annotated the children’s responses.  All of the responses were made either non-verbally or verbally (i. e.  choosing the red or the blue box).  When a child changed his or her mind, we always noted that the one that he or she chose last was the chosen animal.  There was no disagreement between coders on coding decisions.  To equate children’s initial experience with the task, we gave all of them an identical set of example items.  The first practice trial used pictures of a horse and a donkey as choice options, and the children heard an utterance with noun-focus prosody (“It looks like a horse”).  The second practice trial used pictures of a butterfly and a moth, and they heard an utterance with verb-focus prosody (“It LOOKS like a butterfly .  .  . ”).  Children’s responses for these practice trials were analyzed separately.  To collect data from twenty-four adult speakers, we conducted the same experiment as an Internet-based survey through Amazon Mechanical Turk.  We used the web-based platform for the adult data as a means to collect the data efficiently and economically.  To ensure that they had access to audio clips, prior to the experiment, we asked all of the participants to play a demo sound clip and to type in a word that they heard.  We presented the task as “a language experiment targeted for preschoolers”, and we described, with written texts and pictures, how the guessing game was conducted with children.  The participants were instructed to listen to each sentence only once and to answer twoalternative forced-choice questions by clicking on a picture of the intended referent.  As in the live experiment with child participants, all of the adult participants were exposed to the same two example items (i. e.  “It looks like a HORSE” and “It LOOKS like a butterfly .  .  .  ”) and then received the fourteen critical items in a pseudo-randomized order.  They received feedback after each trial.  The adult task was set up so that sound clips were auto-played at the start of each trial, and participants could replay the sound as many times as they needed.  Only two participants used this replay function, twice each.  They could not proceed to the next trial without choosing at least one item.  As in the child version of the task, they could change their mind and reselect an animal in each trial.  They could, however, not go back to previous trials once they had proceeded to the next trial.  We decided a priori to remove datapoints from any participant who showed no variability in responses (i. e.  always choosing a mentioned or an unmentioned animal).  No participants, however, followed that strategy in the current dataset.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION.  The children’s and adults’ responses are presented in Figure .  As shown in Panels (a) and (c), children and adults provided similar responses to the first two practice trials.  in response to the noun-focus contour (i. e.  “It looks like a HORSE”), the animals mentioned were chosen about % of the time.  In response to the verb-focus prosody (i. e.  “It LOOKS like a butterfly .  .  . ”), however, they chose the two pictures (i. e.  a butterfly and a moth) at an approximately equal rate.  In addition, adults and children differed significantly in how they incorporated the feedback given after these first two trials.  As can be seen in Panel (d), adults quickly associated the prosodic contours with the intended interpretations and proceeded to provide near-categorical responses for the fourteen critical trials.  Children’s responses, however, remained at chance level for both prosodic contours.  On average, they chose a mentioned animal (a zebra when the input was It looks like a ZEBRA) % of the time for the noun-focus prosody and % of the time for the verb-focus prosody.  Do the current results simply reflect the fact that adults are better than children at learning an abstract form–meaning pairing quickly.  The strongest version of this view would predict that adults should quickly learn any prosody–meaning mapping.  Experimental evidence shows, however, that adults are NOT willing to learn a new pairing if the relation between the contours and the meanings are unexpected or unpredictable compared to what they are familiar with.  Heeren, Bibyk, Gunlogson, and Tanenhaus (), for instance, demonstrated that adult listeners could not easily learn to remap rising/falling utterance-final boundary tones and assertion vs.  question interpretations, even with constant feedback.  This suggests that, while cognitive flexibility and better understanding of the task probably facilitated the form–meaning mappings in adults, the results must also reflect existing prosodic knowledge.  The adults’ response patterns were compared with those in a previously published study that used a very similar set of visual and audio stimuli.  Kurumada et al.  () conducted a laboratory-based eye-tracking experiment using the current construction “it looks like an X!” and “it LOOKS like an X .  .  . ” while, unlike the current study, providing no feedback after each trial.  They found that adult participants selected the mentioned animal on % of critical trials with noun-focus prosody, but only % of trials with verb-focus prosody.  Adult participants in the current experiment selected the mentioned animal on % of the two practice trials and on % of the fourteen critical trials with noun-focus prosody, and on % of the practice trials and % of the critical trials with verb-focus prosody (Figure ).  Taken together, these results support the view that constant feedback helps adult listeners derive clearly distinguished interpretations based on noun-focus versus verb-focus intonation contours.  Children, however, do not seem to use the feedback as effectively as adults do.  We conducted a mixed-effects regression analysis with the response data for critical trials produced by the four-year-olds (Gelman & Hill, ).  The model included the input prosody (i. 