I N T R O D U C T I O N.  The remediation of misarticulations in children’s speech has been a core part of speech-language pathology practice since the earliest days of the profession (Van Riper,  []), and the treatment of unintelligible speech remains a prominent function of the speech-language pathologist (Schooling, ).  However, treatment approaches are more efficient now that we understand that the underlying nature of the problem is considerably more complex than “persistence of faulty habits of articulation” (Morley, , p.  ).  Modern conceptualizations of speech sound disorders, such as the Speech Disorders Classification System (Shriberg, .  Shriberg, Austin, Lewis, McSweeny & Wilson, .  Shriberg et al. , .  Shriberg, Lewis, Tomblin, McSweeny, Karlsson & Scheer, .  Shriberg, Lohmeier, Strand & Jakielski, ) recognize multiple distal and proximal causes that explain the observed heterogeneity in clinical typology.  Specifically, speech characteristics vary greatly between children with speech sound disorders as well as within children across developmental time.  In terms of distal causes, environmental risk and protective factors interact with the genotype, to produce varying trajectories of speech development.  The heritability of speech disorders is now well established (Lewis et al. , ), and some specific genetic causes have been identified.  For example, polymorphisms in the FOXP gene are associated with apraxia of speech, a motor speech disorder characterized by poor voluntary control of speech movements.  However, these polymorphisms and apraxia of speech as a subtype of speech disorder are both rare.  More commonly, speech difficulties in children are phonological in nature and the underlying distal cause conforms to the common disease / common variant model described by Bishop ().  Accordingly, the etiology is multifactorial, involving interactions among many genetic and environmental factors that combine to explain the full range of variance in speech intelligibility.  The large number of genes involved, each having small effects, accounts for the heterogeneity observed within the general population and within diagnostic subgroups.  Therefore, advances in our understanding of the genetic underpinnings of speech sound disorders have limited direct clinical application despite hope for the future (Morgan, ).  More promising as a guide to individualizing treatment approaches is an understanding of the more proximal causes of the child’s speech problem.  These proximal causes map roughly on to the concept of the endophenotype – the network of structural mechanisms and neurolinguistic processes responsible for speech development.  As a core feature of the disorder, the processes that are associated with the child’s speech deﬁcit should be measurable even as the child matures or when there are changes in the environment.  In other words, stability in the endophenotype is expected even as the phenotype is changing with development and environmental inputs such as speech therapy.  Oral motor functioning and phonological processing will be considered here as possible proximal causes of a primary developmental speech sound disorder.  Several approaches to speech therapy are based on the view that unintelligible or misarticulated speech is caused by diﬃculties with speech motor control (Lof & Watson, ) especially when the child’s speech contains inconsistent speech errors or distortion errors (Betz & StoelGammon, .  Broomﬁeld & Dodd, . 