INTRODUCTION.  Increasingly, there are calls – in contexts of the global, geopolitical South especially – for decoloniality, and there is a respectable and growing body of literature in disciplines such as history, sociology, literature, philosophy and linguistics that are taking the ‘decolonial turn’ (Maldonado-Torres 2011).  Quijano (2000) introduced the notion of decoloniality to emphasize the need to move away from ‘continuing’ coloniality – what Mignolo (1995) refers to as ‘the darker side of modernity’, distinguishing four axes relevant to the enduring colonial matrix of power.  • economic (appropriating land, and control of the economy).  • political (maintaining authority).  • civic life (where gender and sexuality are controlled with Western heteropatriarchal discursive practices).  and • epistemological (pertaining to subjectivity, identity, control, distortion and erasure of knowledge).  In Maldonado-Torres’ (2011.  2) words, Coloniality .  .  .  refers to long-standing patterns of power that emerged as a result of colonialism, but that define culture, labor, intersubjective relations and knowledge production well beyond the strict limits of colonial administrations.  Thus, coloniality survives colonialism.  Decoloniality, then, is a political and epistemic (and spiritual) project to delink from modern colonial designs (Mignolo 2011).  It is the dismantling of relations of power and conceptions of knowledge that foment the reproduction of racial, gender and geo-political hierarchies that came into being or found new and more powerful forms of expression in the modern/colonial world.  (Maldonado-Torres 2011.  117) The decolonial turn has many roots and offshoots.  ‘heightened perception of the linkages between colonialism, racism and other forms of dehumanization in the twentieth century, the formation of ethnic movements of empowerment and feminisms of colour, and the appearance of queer decolonial theorizing’ (Maldonado-Torres 2011.  2).  The many manifestations of decoloniality share a perception of coloniality as a continuing concern in the contemporary world.  An important dimension of enduring coloniality is the ‘knowledge’ we have of our embodied, gendered, racialized and sexualized selves, and the praxes/ practices through which these selves can be inserted into the everyday.  Concepts of gender and race that evolved out of imperial coloniality remain tightly imbricated in contemporary forms of coloniality/modernity.  The ‘voices’ with which we speak ourselves and the scripts that we follow in these respects remain those of colonial discourse.  Conceptualizations of gender that articulate with race are reproduced through specific global sociopolitical forms of political organization, as well as circulated across the globe in Western heteropatriarchal discourses of entertainment and thought.  Mohanty (2003.  514) notes how modern-day manifestations of coloniality ‘global capitalism and neoliberal policies writes its script especially in the bodies and lives of women and girls from the third world’.  In the postapartheid context of South Africa, the intersectionalities of race, gender and economic disparities underlie widespread practices of patriarchy, rape and sexual discrimination.  However, despite the intimacy and carnality of the coloniality nexus of sex, gender and race, Arboleda-Rıos (2014) notes that ‘the ways in which lesbian, homosexual, bisexual, transgender and/or queer subjects confront interlocking systems of oppression have been consistently disregarded’ by the decoloniality collective.  Furthermore, the connections between enduring racialization and the production of race and sexuality remain in need of explication.  Mbembe (2017.  55) makes the point that ‘our critique of modernity will remain incomplete if we fail to grasp that the coming of modernity coincided with the appearance of the principle of race’.  He goes on to say that ‘[i]n order to reproduce itself, the principle of race depends on an assemblage of practices whose immediate and direct target is the body of the Other and whose scope is life in general’ (2017.  56) – including, importantly, sexuality.  In her much-cited, seminal work on decolonial feminism, Lugones (2010) explicates the mutual co-constitution of gender and race in practices of slavery and colonization.  And Sally Kitch (2009.  169) notes how ‘sexual difference and the gender binary became basic tenets of the ideology of racial hierarchy and white supremacy during processes of nation formation in the West’.  Gunkel (2010.  11) explains that, through hypersexualizing the (black) Other, ‘colonialism constituted race as a sexualised category, and sexuality a racialized category.  However, it was not only heterosexuality that was racially constructed, but also divergent sexualities’.  Drag and decoloniality.  One area in which these complex interactions are literally on show and open to reflection is the drag performance.  Drag shows are arguably a form of decolonial aesthetic or decolonial aestheSis (Mignolo and Vasquez 2013), a dimension of decoloniality that seeks to replace the coloniality of traditional aesthetics with alternative ways of sensing and perceiving.  They are typical instances of performances that seek to parody and disrupt colonialities of gender or sexuality, by showing that they are in no way ‘natural’ or stable, as we are led to believe.  Although much has been written on drag queens, less is known about how drag kings go about the task of disrupting sexuality and gender.  A drag king is most often (but not always) a woman who dresses up in costume that is recognizably masculine, and who performs theatrically in that costume (Halberstam 1997, 1998, 2001).  Mu~noz (1999.  99) remarks on how queer performances allow performers and their audiences (through disidentification) to resist ‘the interpellating call of ideology that fixes a subject within the state power apparatus’.  Halberstam (1998) argues that the subversive power of the drag performance lies in the fact that drag parades discontinuities between gender and sex or appearance and reality, but doesn’t allow these discontinuities to be read as dysfunction (as they would be in ordinary circumstances).  Instead, these inconsistencies become a site of gender creativity (cf.  Butler 1996), and there is thus a strong claim here to be disrupting normativities of masculinity through holding them up for laughter.  However, genres (including performance genres) are sites of social (re) production – of people, persona, place and registers – as much as they invite social change.  They are therefore also a potential carrier of global-colonial structurations (global circulation).  Shome (2000.  367) has argued that ‘cultural products such as texts, .  .  .  legitimize and reproduce – the genre allows gender and race to shift location, and to appear anew’ thereby reproducing patterns in ‘the everyday organization of social and cultural relations [which] function to confer benefits and systemic advantage to whites’ (cf.  Williams and Stroud 2014).  The question then becomes in what ways, and to what extent, do performance genres such as drag king further a decolonial critique of the colonialities of the body.  that is, gender, sexuality and race and their embodiment.  In what sense can they be seen as articulations of a decolonial aesthetics.  Do drag shows break ‘silences, disrup[ting] dominant narratives and create a transformative consciousness’, as Cervantes and Salda~na claim to be the case for hip hop and nueva cancion (2015.  84).  Do they provide a means to ‘delink from coloniality and exercise a “decolonial imaginary”’ (Perez 1999.  5).  In this paper, we approach these questions with a close analysis of four excerpts from two performances by a troupe of drag kings called Bros B4 Ho’s (sic)2 who promote themselves as ‘South Africa’s first ever Drag King troupe’. 3 In interviews the motivation behind their performances is presented as clearly political in nature (OUT Africa Magazine 2012) and, on the group’s Facebook page, the kings explain that they ‘use satire, irony, and parody .  .  .  to subvert cultural hegemony and conventions and empower them[selves]’.  It’s clear that, to them, resisting and disrupting hegemony is a big part of their project.  On the basis of our analysis of the drag king troupe, we argue that deconstructions of gendered relationships, or the remapping of sexualities across gender categories, or the erasure of simple gender binaries oftentimes implicate the continued production and circulation of racial and sexual hierarchy.  In fact, we make a stronger claim. 