I N T R O D U C T I O N.  The remediation of misarticulations in children’s speech has been a core part of speech-language pathology practice since the earliest days of the profession (Van Riper,  []), and the treatment of unintelligible speech remains a prominent function of the speech-language pathologist (Schooling, ).  However, treatment approaches are more efficient now that we understand that the underlying nature of the problem is considerably more complex than “persistence of faulty habits of articulation” (Morley, , p.  ).  Modern conceptualizations of speech sound disorders, such as the Speech Disorders Classification System (Shriberg, .  Shriberg, Austin, Lewis, McSweeny & Wilson, .  Shriberg et al. , .  Shriberg, Lewis, Tomblin, McSweeny, Karlsson & Scheer, .  Shriberg, Lohmeier, Strand & Jakielski, ) recognize multiple distal and proximal causes that explain the observed heterogeneity in clinical typology.  Specifically, speech characteristics vary greatly between children with speech sound disorders as well as within children across developmental time.  In terms of distal causes, environmental risk and protective factors interact with the genotype, to produce varying trajectories of speech development.  The heritability of speech disorders is now well established (Lewis et al. , ), and some specific genetic causes have been identified.  For example, polymorphisms in the FOXP gene are associated with apraxia of speech, a motor speech disorder characterized by poor voluntary control of speech movements.  However, these polymorphisms and apraxia of speech as a subtype of speech disorder are both rare.  More commonly, speech difficulties in children are phonological in nature and the underlying distal cause conforms to the common disease / common variant model described by Bishop ().  Accordingly, the etiology is multifactorial, involving interactions among many genetic and environmental factors that combine to explain the full range of variance in speech intelligibility.  The large number of genes involved, each having small effects, accounts for the heterogeneity observed within the general population and within diagnostic subgroups.  Therefore, advances in our understanding of the genetic underpinnings of speech sound disorders have limited direct clinical application despite hope for the future (Morgan, ).  More promising as a guide to individualizing treatment approaches is an understanding of the more proximal causes of the child’s speech problem.  These proximal causes map roughly on to the concept of the endophenotype – the network of structural mechanisms and neurolinguistic processes responsible for speech development.  As a core feature of the disorder, the processes that are associated with the child’s speech deﬁcit should be measurable even as the child matures or when there are changes in the environment.  In other words, stability in the endophenotype is expected even as the phenotype is changing with development and environmental inputs such as speech therapy.  Oral motor functioning and phonological processing will be considered here as possible proximal causes of a primary developmental speech sound disorder.  Several approaches to speech therapy are based on the view that unintelligible or misarticulated speech is caused by diﬃculties with speech motor control (Lof & Watson, ) especially when the child’s speech contains inconsistent speech errors or distortion errors (Betz & StoelGammon, .  Broomﬁeld & Dodd, .  Forrest, ).  However, motor speech disorders are actually very rare, perhaps –% of the population of children with primary developmental speech impairments (e. g.  Bradford & Dodd, .  Shriberg, ).  Some children with speech errors demonstrate signiﬁcant diﬃculties with strength, rate, or patterns of articulator movement when assessed with appropriate technologies (Gibbon, .  Goozée, Murdoch, Ozanne, Cheng, Hill & Gibbon, ).  However, these diﬃculties cannot be discerned from the characteristics of the children’s speech errors, as is sometimes assumed as in the case of socalled phonetic disorder, i. e.  distortion errors are thought to be motoric in nature but in fact are often associated with cognitive-linguistic endophenotypes and may not be associated with underlying phonetic instability (Preston & Edwards, .  Preston & Koenig, ).  Therefore, more direct measures of speech motor control, such as maximum performance tasks, are more diagnostically informative (Thoonen, Maassen, Gabreels & Schreuder, .  Murray, McCabe, Heard & Ballard, ).  Children with speech sound disorders have been observed to struggle with a range of tasks that involve encoding, storing, and manipulating  phonological representations as measured by tests of speech perception (Edwards, Fox & Rogers,), phonological memory (Munson, Edwards & Beckman, .  Sahlén, Reuterskiöld-Wagner, Nettelbladt & Radeborg, .  Shriberg et al. ,(Anthony, Greenblatt Aghara, Dunkelberger, Anthony, Williams & Zhang, .  Bird, Bishop & .  Rvachew & Grawburg, and phonological awareness (Freeman, .  Larrivee & Catts, ). Phonological processing impairments are particularly well established as an endophenotype for speech sound disorder, especially since children with a history of unintelligible speech who no longer present with surface speech errors nonetheless continue to present with long-standing phonological processing deficits (Raitano, Pennington, Tunick, Boada & Shriberg, ).  Furthermore, these deficits in phonological processing are associated with concomitant reading disability, and this conjoint risk for speech and reading disability is associated with common genetic risk factors (Smith, Pennington, Boada & Shriberg, ).  Although research at the endophenotype level leads to a sense of consensus (the majority of children with a speech sound disorder have difficulties with phonological processing), the links from the endophenotype to the phenotype level of description are not straightforward.  As previously mentioned, the clinical presentation of children with speech sound disorders is heterogeneous, and various schemas have been proposed to group the population into subtypes based on profiles of speech errors.  In particular, Dodd () has proposed that distortion errors, inconsistent errors, typical phonological process errors, and atypical error patterns differentiate subtypes that also map onto discrete proximal causes.  In particular, children with atypical patterns of phonological error were expected to have a family history of speech errors and underlying difficulties with phonological processing, but in fact these characteristics were found to be commonly occurring among samples of English-speaking children with a speech sound disorder, regardless of their patterns of speech errors.  Rather, the error type profiles identified by Dodd may reflect developmental and severity gradients rather than qualitative differences between subgroups of children (Rvachew & Brosseau-Lapré, ).  Heterogeneity in the pattern of speech errors produced by children with speech sound disorders might also reflect environmental factors rather than differences in the underlying phenotype.  This can be seen by comparing the speech errors produced by children learning different languages.  Recently, we compared the types of speech sound errors produced by twenty-four Quebec French-speaking children to those produced by twenty-four Canadian English-speaking children, with both groups recruited from speech therapy caseloads (Brosseau-Lapré & Rvachew, ).  The groups were carefully matched for age and receptive vocabulary skills.  furthermore, they were matched for percent consonants correct in their spontaneous speech to ensure equivalent severity of the speech impairment across the two groups.  One might expect similarity in the kinds of error patterns observed because the consonant inventory is largely overlapping in French and English /p, b, t, d, k, ɡ, m, n, f, v, s, z, ʃ, ʒ, l, w, j/.  for a description of the French phonological system we refer the reader to Walker ().  Despite the fact that a few segments are unique to French (/ɲ, ʁ, ɥ/), and several English segments are absent from the French inventory (/ɹ, tʃ, dʒ, θ, ð, h/.  /ŋ/ being absent except in a few instances such as /kãpiŋkaʁ/), it is possible to describe error patterns in both languages according to phonological processes (Bishop & MinorCorriveau, ) or delinking features (Bérubé, Bernhardt & Stemberger, ) that are common to both languages.  Notwithstanding these similarities in consonant inventory, striking differences in the frequencies of occurrence for consonants (Crystal, ) and syllables shapes (Adda-Decker, Boula de Mareüil, Adda & Lamel, ) must be considered.  In particular, the core syllable shape in French is a simple CV, in comparison to English which uses proportionally more closed syllables (Stokes, Kern & Dos Santos, ).  Another important difference between these two languages is the absence of lexical stress in French, which organizes prosody around the phrase as the accentual unit.  In conversational French, stress placement falls on the last full syllable of a group, such as the utterance or a syntactic or semantic phrase, with a counter-accent on the first syllable of the group (Di Cristo, ).  Therefore, the last syllable of an isolated word would be stressed, as in jambon ‘ham’ [ˌʒãˈbɔ̃].  when the word is placed in a phrase such as le jambon chaud ‘the hot ham’ [ˌlə ʒãbɔ̃ ˈʃo], no syllables in the word are stressed as the accent and counter-accent shift to the edges of the phrase.  Brosseau-Lapré and Rvachew () concluded that these differences in prosody combined with the longer word lengths in French compared to English accounted for a significant difference in the patterns of speech error that we observed between groups of children with speech sound disorder speaking these two languages.  Specifically, French-speaking children produced significantly more syllable structure errors than English-speaking children.  In contrast, English-speaking children produced more errors involving segments, while leaving the syllable structure of the word intact.  Other findings are consistent with this conclusion, such as the very early age of consonant mastery observed for Quebec French-speaking children by MacLeod, Sutton, Trudeau, and Thordardottir ().  Differing patterns of cluster errors by Quebec French-speaking children, relative to Canadian English-speaking children, also appear to reflect these trade-offs between word shape and prosody between the two languages (Rvachew & Brosseau-Lapré, .  Rvachew, Leroux & Brosseau-Lapré, ).  <Middle> Purpose of the study.  To our knowledge, no study has described the psycholinguistic profiles of French-speaking children with a speech disorder.  Endophenotypes, being core determinants of a disorder, are expected to remain stable despite environmental variation, such as the characteristics of the child’s ambient language.  We believe it is important to determine whether the same endophenotypes that have been identified in English-speaking children (measures of phonological processing and oral motor skills) are also involved in French-speaking children.  Here we describe the endophenotypic characteristics of seventy-two French-speaking children recruited from speech therapy caseloads in Quebec.  The children were diagnosed with a trouble phonologique, that will be referred to as DEVELOPMENTAL PHONOLOGICAL DISORDER (DPD), for the remainder of this paper.  This diagnostic term describes a primary and developmental speech sound disorder that is characterized by the production of many more speech sound errors than would be expected given the child’s age, with a concomitant impact on the intelligibility of the child’s speech.  The primary hypothesis is that these Quebec French-speaking children with DPD will present with an endophenotypic profile consistent with that observed in English-speaking children with a primary developmental speech sound disorder.  specifically, most of the children are expected to have difficulties with phonological processing, and only a very small proportion of children are expected to present with a motor speech disorder.  A secondary hypothesis is that articulation accuracy will be predicted by vocabulary and phonological processing skills, with oralmotor function not explaining speech deficits in Quebec French-speaking children.  Confirmation of a similar endophenotype for speech sound disorder cross-linguistically, despite differences in the phenotypic profile, will have theoretical and clinical implications for our understanding of this commonly occurring developmental disorder. Participants The children with DPD were recruited in six cohorts and were referred to the study by speech-language pathologists (SLPs) at the Montreal Children’s Hospital.  Each child was assessed by the first author, a certified SLP, or by graduate students in speech-language pathology under the supervision of the first author.  The assessments were conducted in a testing room at the Montreal Children’s Hospital or in a research laboratory at McGill University.  A total of seventy-two eligible children completed the intake assessment over one visit of – minutes.  During this time, most parents completed questionnaires about their child’s development, and medical and family history.  a few families asked to complete the questionnaires at home with their spouse.  The percentage of exposure to French was established by questionnaire.  parents were asked about language use from each household member to the child.  from each caregiver to the child in daycare or preschool.  the child’s language exposure through media and organized activities.  and the child’s language exposure through playmates. 