I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Distinguishing between declaratives and interrogatives is an important ability for language users.  In English and many other languages, interrogatives generally involve syntactic structures and word order patterns that are different from declaratives.  For example, in English the canonical ordering in simple transitive declarative sentences is subject– verb–object (Slobin & Bever, ), as in Anna likes chocolate.  However, this ordering is disrupted in the associated polar interrogative, which inverts the subject and auxiliary verb, and inserts an utterance-initial do, since no auxiliary is present.  Thus, Anna likes chocolate becomes Does Anna like chocolate.  Moreover, in so-called wh-questions, a grammatical phrase that normally occurs in the declarative form is absent, and its content is queried by a wh-word – e. g.  who, what, where, how, etc.  – that occurs at the beginning of the sentence (Whatt does Anna like ti. ).  (The t stands for ‘trace’, and represents the structural location of the constituent that is related to the wh-word that shares its index – in this case, the direct object of like. ) Similar kinds of word order variations occur in many other (primarily Indo-European) languages (e. g.  Dryer, .  König & Siemund, ).  In many prominent theories of syntax acquisition, children learn basic word order (i. e.  the relative placement of subject nouns, object nouns, and verbs) and morphosyntax by bootstrapping off of declarative sentences (typically transitive declaratives) and typical linkages between syntactic positions in simple declarative sentences and elements of the scenes they describe (Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz & Gleitman, .  Pinker, ).  Thus, given the differences in word order and morphosyntactic patterning of declaratives and interrogatives, distinguishing the two sentence types is crucial for correctly learning the syntax of both types of utterances.  Learning mechanisms that analyzed declaratives and interrogatives as the same type would result in cascading errors in syntax acquisition, since fundamental misanalysis early on would result in incorrect representations in learning as subsequent utterances are processed (Pinker, ).  Since interrogatives constitute close to half of the utterances in young children’s input, in roughly equal proportions of polar interrogatives and wh-questions (% and %, respectively.  Newport, ), understanding when and how learners start to differentiate interrogatives and declaratives is important for understanding grammatical acquisition more broadly.  One way of distinguishing declaratives and interrogatives would simply be to use the word order properties just described as a basis for segregating sentence types.  Indeed, -month-olds appear to be able to use word order information in just this way (Geffen & Mintz, ).  However, there is reason to doubt that infants could use distributional information of this type as the INITIAL source of information for discriminating sentences.  To see why, consider the kind of information infants would have to rely on if they did not already know the distributional properties of declarative syntax.  The distributional information involves a small set of highly frequent closed-class words (auxiliary verbs and wh-words) occurring in sentence-initial position.  While infants could classify sentences as interrogatives based on this property, it is hard to see how infants could discover this property a priori.  For one thing, if such a segregation is based on words rather than categories – i. e.  who, what, which, does, etc. , rather than wh-word, AUX – then it is not clear how to avoid segregating other sentences that are syntactically similar but differ in their initial words.  For example, such a procedure would create distinctions between utterances that start with determiners and those that start with pronouns, despite their shared underlying structure (e. g.  sentences like The boy saw the girl vs.  You saw the girl).  This problem might be avoided with knowledge of the syntactic categories (e. g.  wh-operator, AUX, NP), but it is not clear that infants have the requisite category knowledge at a point in acquisition where making sentence-type discrimination would be important.  Furthermore, even if infants did have that category knowledge, it is not clear how they would know to use those category distinctions – i. e.  wh-word and AUX vs.  everything else – and not other distinctions as a basis for segregating declaratives and interrogatives.  Indeed, being able to distinguish declaratives from interrogatives might be a prerequisite for successfully learning at least some of those categories in the first place, as well as their correlation with sentence type.  Thus, another source of information is likely to be necessary to make initial sentence-type distinctions.  There is reason to believe that sentence-level prosody provides just such an information source.  Prosody as a cue to sentence type Prosody consists of pitch, duration, and intensity.  Here we outline the potential role of these components in cueing sentence type.  Pitch.  In many languages, the final pitch contour is an important perceptual cue for sentence-type discrimination (American English.  Săfárŏvá & Swerts, .  Castilian Spanish.  Face, .  French.  Vion & Colas, ).  In adult-directed speech, polar interrogatives typically end with a final rise in pitch, while declaratives end with final flat or falling intonation (Bartels, .  Hedberg, Sosa & Fadden, .  Ladd, ), although there are some exceptions (e. g.  Belfast English.  Jarman & Cruttenden, .  Chickasaw.  Gordon, ).  The same is true of declarative questions, which differ from declarative statements only in prosody (e. g.  Anna likes chocolate. ).  If speech to infants is similarly organized, prosody could provide a robust tool for initially distinguishing sentence types.  Perceptual studies have demonstrated that, while the exact cues adults use to distinguish between declaratives and interrogatives may vary by language, most languages rely on some form of pitch cue (e. g.  Gussenhoven & Chen, ).  For example, although Russian has wh-words, sentences often do not include lexical or syntactic/grammatical indicators of sentence type (Makarova, ).  Russian has relatively free word order and no auxiliary verbs (Rojina, ), so listeners rely on pitch peak alignment rather than lexical cues to perceive distinctions between declaratives and polar interrogatives (Makarova, .  Svetozarova, ).  Declaratives and exclamations have earlier accent pitch peaks (here defined as THE F MAXIMUM ALONG THE SEGMENTAL STRING OF A THREE-SYLLABLE WORD.  Makarova, ) than interrogatives (this is also seen in Dutch.  van Heuven & Haan, ).  There is also an effect of pitch peak height, where interrogatives have higher pitch peaks than declaratives (Makarova, ).  In languages like English and French, which do use lexical markings (e. g.  auxiliary verbs) to distinguish sentence types, adults primarily rely on fundamental frequency for perceiving distinctions between sentence types (English.  Cruttenden, .  Lieberman, .  French.  Vion & Colas, ).  In many languages, the final pitch contour is a critical (if not the most important) region for discriminating between interrogatives and declaratives.  A gating study with French noun phrases found that listeners’ accuracy in making a sentence-type judgment improved nearly % (% to %) when final pitch information was introduced at the end of an utterance.  In the absence of this final prosodic information, subjects defaulted to a declarative judgment (Vion & Colas, ).  Various dialects of English also rely on final pitch contours as an important perceptual cue for sentence-type discrimination (British English [e. g.  London, Cambridge].  Grabe, .  although see Jarman & Cruttenden, ).  For example, Săfárŏvá and Swerts () found that American English speakers were more likely to identify utterances as declarative questions if the utterances ended with a final rise.  Duration.  Duration is a secondary prosodic correlate of sentence type in other Germanic languages (e. g.  Dutch, Orkney English.  van Heuven & van Zanten, ) in which pitch is the primary prosodic cue.  For instance, in Dutch, interrogatives typically have a faster speech rate than declaratives, although this difference is more apparent in declarative questions than polar interrogatives.  In addition, perceptual studies have demonstrated that -month-olds can use syllable duration differences to detect syntactic boundaries, but only in conjunction with other converging cues such as pitch changes (e. g.  Hirsh-Pasek, Kemler Nelson, Jusczyk, Cassidy, Druss & Kennedy, .  Jusczyk, Hirsh-Pasek, Kemler Nelson, Kennedy, Woodward & Piwoz, ).  Thus, to the degree that duration covaries with pitch in relation to sentence type, infants could potentially use duration in combination with pitch to discriminate declaratives and interrogatives.  Intensity.  Intensity correlates with the other dimensions of prosody, especially pitch, and infants appear to be sensitive to this correlation (Fernald, ).  For example, in English, stressed syllables are marked by higher pitch and intensity compared to non-stressed syllables (Hay & Saffran, ).  Thus, as with duration, to the extent that intensity correlates with other prosodic cues that differentiate declaratives from interrogatives, intensity could contribute to sentence-type discrimination.  Summary of prosodic cues with respect to sentence type.  To summarize the research we have just discussed, in English and many other languages, declaratives and interrogatives give rise to different prosodic patterns, particularly in the final pitch contour.  Moreover, adult listeners rely on prosodic information to make sentence-type distinctions in perception.  However, with respect to English, the distinguishing prosodic difference between declaratives and interrogatives seems to hold only with respect to polar interrogatives (i. e.  yes/no questions), and not wh-questions.  Wh-questions usually have a falling or level pitch, and thus have final contours similar to declaratives (Hedberg et al. , .  Ladd, .  Ladefoged & Johnson, ), at least in adult-directed speech.  One important question we address in this paper is whether similar prosodic patterns across sentence types are evident in infant-directed speech, and how infants might use prosody to discriminate sentence types.  Establishing the prosodic characteristics of wh-questions, polar interrogatives, and declaratives is critical for understanding how prosody could be used by infants to classify utterances in syntactically meaningful ways.  However, before discussing our analyses, we briefly discuss prior research on infants’ sensitivity to prosody.  Infants’ sensitivity to prosody.  There is some evidence that young infants might start out using prosody as a perceptual cue to sentence-type distinctions.  Frota, Butler, and Vigário () tested infants learning European Portuguese, a language which distinguishes between sentence types using ONLY prosodic information, and found that infants as young as five to six months can distinguish between declaratives and polar interrogatives.  Soderstrom, Ko, and Nevzorova () tested English-learning infants between . · and .  years of age and found that they could distinguish declarative statements from declarative questions, which only differ in their prosodic contours, suggesting some ability on the part of infants to discriminate sentence types based on prosody.  However, the wide age range of the subjects (between . · and . ) makes it diﬃcult to determine when this ability begins.  Moreover, speakers may modify prosody more sharply to mark declarative questions as questions, compared to more typical interrogative types (e. g.  polar interrogatives).  While it remains unclear when English-learning infants begin to use prosodic information to distinguish between sentence types, there is a wealth of evidence demonstrating infants’ general sensitivity to prosodic information from an early age.  Infants can use prosody to make distinctions between broad rhythmic classes of languages (Mehler, Jusczyk, Lambertz, Halsted, Bertoncini & Amiel-Tison, .  Moon, Cooper & Fifer, .  Nazzi, Bertoncini & Mehler, .  see Nespor, Shukla & Mehler, , for an overview of rhythmic classification).  In addition, infants can use their sensitivity to prosodic cues to identify syntactic unit boundaries including clauses (e. g.  Hirsh-Pasek et al. , .  Kemler Nelson, Hirsh-Pasek, Jusczyk, and Cassidy, ) and phrases (Gerken, Jusczyk & Mandel, .  Jusczyk et al. , ).  Thus, there is ample evidence that infants are sensitive to prosody, suggesting that they could, in principle, use prosodic information to make initial sentence-type distinctions.  OUTLINE OF THE STUDY The goal of the present study was to evaluate the prosodic properties of declaratives and interrogatives in infant-directed speech in American English, with the aim of understanding whether prosodic information would be useful, in principle, for the initial discrimination of sentence types by infants.  There has not, to our knowledge, been any thorough analysis of infant-directed speech that establishes the availability of prosodic cues to sentence type.  As we indicated earlier, such information could play an important role in early syntactic acquisition.  Recall that, in adult-directed speech, polar interrogatives and whquestions have different prosodic properties (Hedberg et al. , ), with wh-questions patterning similarly to declaratives (Ladd, ).  Therefore, a particular question we address is whether the two question types have similar prosodic properties in infant-directed speech, as well as how they differ from declaratives.  To address this question, we examined typical prosodic contours in the speech of three mothers to their preverbal infants.  We evaluated the prosodic characteristics of declaratives, polar interrogatives, and wh-questions to determine whether there is a common set of prosodic features that distinguish declaratives and either type of interrogative.  Based on the findings with adult-directed speech, we hypothesized that prosodic information would distinguish between declaratives and polar interrogatives, but that prosody would not be a viable source of information for distinguishing between declaratives and wh-questions.  In Analysis , we describe the prosodic measures we examined across sentence types, and present results organized as contrasting pairs of sentence types (declaratives vs.  polar interrogatives, declaratives vs.  whquestions, and polar interrogatives vs.  wh-questions).  Broadly, we measured the distribution of pitch (F), duration, and intensity over the final two syllables of declaratives, wh-questions, and polar interrogatives, in speech addressed to infants, and we present two sets of analyses based on these measurements.  To preview our results, we do indeed find that prosodic measures differ between declaratives and polar interrogatives, but not wh-questions.  In Analysis , we present a linear classification model that, when trained on the prosodic characteristics of a subset of declaratives and polar interrogatives, can classify untrained utterances at above-chance levels.  Finally, we examine the implications of our results for infants’ sentence-type discrimination ability.  <Middle> ANALYSIS .  PROSODIC DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DECLARATIVES AND INTERROGATIVES.  METHODS.  Input corpora.  We evaluated input to three English-learning children from the Brent corpus (Brent & Siskind, , files s, s, and v) from the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, ) for the analysis procedure.  We selected the Brent corpus because it contains speech to preverbal infants, and provides the largest number of audio-recordings of Standard American Englishspeaking mother–child dyads of any corpora in the database.  We only analyzed utterances of the mother directed towards her preverbal infant, taken from two to three consecutive sessions spanning a – week period depending on the subject.  Infants ages ranged from . · to . ·.  Recordings were made in the subjects’ homes.  Mothers were fitted with a small waist pack and a lapel microphone located just below their mouths, and instructed to go about their daily routines while home alone with the child (Brent & Siskind, ).  Selection of utterances.  We analyzed approximately thirty utterances per sentence type (declarative, wh-question, and polar interrogative) for each speaker, for a total of roughly ninety utterances per speaker.  Sentences had to meet several criteria for inclusion.  We based our initial selection criteria on structural properties.  Polar interrogatives were characterized by subject and auxiliary inversion, possibly in combination with do-support. 