Intro.  Bilingual children are commonly categorized as either simultaneous or sequential (Goldstein, ), although the age criteria deﬁning each group vary among researchers.  Without controversy, children who learn two languages from birth are designated as simultaneous bilinguals (Padilla & Lindholm, ), but so have been those who learn two languages within the ﬁrst year after birth (Genesee, Paradis & Crago, ), or even up to age three (McLaughlin, ).  Following McLaughlin, we identify children exposed to both languages before three years of age as ‘simultaneous bilinguals’, or, simply, bilingual children.  Phonetic category formation in the sense of this paper refers to the processes by which bilingual or second language (L) speakers come to distinguish phonetic details of shared phonemes in each language (Flege & Eefting, .  Flege, .  Yeni-Komshian, Flege & Liu, ).  For example, Spanish and English share the phoneme /p/, but /p/ in each language is produced with diﬀerent voice-onset-time (VOT) values.  Thus, it is an interesting question whether bilingual or L speakers exhibit accurate phonetic realizations of Spanish /p/ and English /p/ when speaking the two languages.  While phonetic category formation in production has been investigated extensively in adult bilingual and L speakers (see Flege, .  Bohn & Munro, , for more information), little such research has been carried out with bilingual children, although more robust ﬁndings have been reported in the perceptual domain.  The purpose of this study was to determine whether three-year-old Korean–English bilingual (KEB) children fully distinguish stop and vowel categories in their productions of the two languages, and how these two systems interact with each other.  Whether bilingual children develop one versus two linguistic systems in the learning of their respective languages has long been of interest to bilingual researchers (Swain, .  Padilla & Liebmann, .  Volterra & Taeschner, .  Genesse, .  Goodz, ).  Although dominant findings support the notion that bilingual children do operate with two systems, the question has not been fully investigated in the phonetic domain among young bilingual children (i. e.  three-year-olds) due to methodological limitations (e. g.  sample size).  In particular, most such studies examined the two-way voiced and voiceless stop contrasts of English–Spanish or English–German bilingual children.  But it is not clear whether similar characteristics are found among KEB children because Korean has a three-way laryngeal manner contrast in stops.  Moreover, previous studies examining the phonetic categories of young bilingual children investigated either stops or vowels, not both systems simultaneously, leaving open the question of whether these develop in tandem or in sequence.  More recent attention has been paid to examining the degree of interaction between the two languages of bilingual children (Paradis, ), and several hypotheses have been proposed.  Positing three types of interdependence (transfer, acceleration, delay), Paradis and Genesee () hypothesized that the grammars of bilingual children are acquired autonomously during the acquisition process.  Conversely, Johnson and Lancaster () concluded that the features of one language may influence those of the other.  While most research on this issue has dealt with the lexical, syntactic, and phonological domains, the present study pursues the question with respect to phonetic properties.  English and Korean stops and vowels Before turning to the existing literature in phonetic category formation, we briefly review the phonetics of stops and front vowels in Korean and English.  The Korean and English stop systems are compared in Table .  Korean contrasts three manners of stops, all of which are voiceless in word-initial position, but these differ with respect to degree of aspiration and f in the following vowel (Kang & Guion, ).  The three Korean stop types are often called ‘lenis’, ‘aspirated’, and ‘fortis’.  The VOT periods of lenis and aspirated stops are longer than for fortis stops, while the f values of aspirated and fortis stops are higher than for lenis stops (Cho, Jun & Ladefoged, . 