I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Detailed research into the biological foundations of language in the context of growth and maturation – including babbling around six months of age to the production of full meaningful sentences by the age of three years (e. g.  Kuhl, .  Saﬀran, Werker & Werner, ) – has led some to suggest that young children have innate dispositions and incredible abilities to learn any natural language (Lenneberg, ).  Although newborns begin life with the ability to discriminate both native and non-native phonological contrasts attested in the world’s languages (e. g.  Best & Tyler, .  Eimas, Siqueland, Jusczyk & Vigorito, .  Polka & Werker, .  Streeter, .  Werker & Tees,their ability to discriminate non-native consonants and vowels gradually declines between  and  months as a result of consistent exposure to a speciﬁc language (e. g.  Best & McRoberts, .  Best, McRoberts, LaFleur & Silver-Isenstadt, .  Werker & Tees, ), whereas similar ability to discriminate native consonants and vowels are maintained and enhanced over the same time period (Kuhl, Stevens, Hayashi, Deguchi, Kiritani & Iverson, ).  The language-dependent perceptual reorganization during infancy with perceptual narrowing for the native phonological contrasts is considered to be largely attributable to ‘statistical learning’.  tracking the frequencies of the exposed sound tokens and using this information to tune into native phonological categories (Best & McRoberts, .  Kuhl, .  Maye, Werker & Gerken, ).  Such phonological contrasts of diﬀerent spoken languages can be divided into segmental units, including consonants and vowels, and suprasegmental units, such as stresses and tones.  Almost –% of the world’s languages are tone languages (Yip, ), and over half of the world’s people speak a tone language (Fromkin, ).  Many studies on infant tone perception have revealed that the process of perceptual reorganization is shaped by the ambient tonal language.  In one longitudinal case study, the perceptual discrimination of Cantonese tones was found to begin at the tenth month (Tse, ).  In another study by Mattock and Burnham (), infants were tested on their ability to discriminate Thai tone contrasts.  Results indicated that English-exposed infants demonstrated attenuation in tone sensitivity between  and  months, while Chinese-learning infants exhibited a sustained sensitivity to Thai tones over this period.  Moreover, developmental changes in tone perception were systematically explored by Yeung, Chen, and Werker ().  Their results demonstrated that language experience might affect the perception of lexical tones as early as  months.  English-, Cantonese-, and Mandarin-exposed infants each demonstrated different discrimination abilities that accorded with the properties of their native language at this stage.  This study suggests that the formation of tone categories evolves earlier than that for vowels and consonants.  What was previously regarded as a language-general stage of phonological development (from birth to  months) appears not to be so for infants with tone languages as their mother tongue.  Modern Mandarin is a tone language with relatively simple syllable structure (see Figure ).  Each syllable must be attached with one of the four lexical tones distinguishing different meanings (Tone .  high-level tone.  Tone .  mid-rising tone.  Tone .  low-falling-rising tone.  and Tone .  high-falling tone).  Lexical tones and nuclear vowels are compulsory elements for Mandarin syllables, whereas the onsets and the ending consonants are optional (Wang, ).  Hua and Dodd () systematically studied the production of Mandarin among one- to four-year-old children, reporting that children acquired phonological elements in the following order.  tones were acquired first, followed by vowels and syllable-final consonants, which were then followed by syllable-initial consonants.  The phonological saliency hypothesis (Hua & Dodd, ) might account for the order of phonological production in Mandarin, with Mandarin tones being the most salient.  Moreover, in a large-scale population-based production study with children aged two to twelve years (To, Cheung & McLeod, ), results also showed that tone production was early acquired, followed by vowels and then by consonants.  Earlier studies (e. g.  Chao, .  Clumeck, .  Hua, .  Hua & Dodd, .  Li & Tompson, ) have indicated that lexical tones are produced early, with considerable accuracy before age three.  Judgments of tone errors in these studies were typically made by native adult observers in a categorical fashion (correct or incorrect).  However, it is important to note that the aforementioned early production of tones in children before three years of age does not mean that these children have the same abilities of tonal production as do adults.  Innovations in speech analysis tools have afforded greater precision in the evaluation of early tone productions.  A series of studies (Wong, , .  Wong, Schwartz & Jenkins, ) have reported that three- to five-year-old preschoolers have not yet fully mastered the production of Mandarin tones.  None of the Mandarin tones produced by the three- to five-year-old children reached adult-like accuracy, suggesting a protracted course of development extending beyond age five.  Moreover, Yang, Diehl, and Davis () investigated the duration of Mandarin tones produced by five-, eight-, and twelve-year-old monolingual Mandarin-speaking children and young adults.  Although five- and eight-year-olds have already established lexical contrasts of Mandarin tones, adult-like tone production is still developing, with tone duration approximating adult values only in twelve-year-old children.  These findings stood in contrast to earlier studies that claim very early acquisition of stable tone productions (Chao, .  Clumeck, .  Hua, .  Hua & Dodd, .  Li & Tompson, ).  Furthermore, Wong’s studies suggested that tones did not necessarily mature in advance of vowels and consonants in production (Wong, , ).  ForMandarin tone perception, although the study of three-year-old children suggests they already show relatively high perceptual accuracy (around %) of all four Mandarin tones (Wong et al. , ), research on the developmental course of categorical perception (CP) of Mandarin tones is still lacking.  The study of CP is useful because it offers a much more refined perceptual method to track the course of maturation and stabilization in children’s fine-grained perception of Mandarin tones beyond age three.  CP is one of the most extensively studied phenomena in speech perception over the past fifty years.  It is important in cognitive science because it reflects the adaptation of the perceptual system to facilitate categorization among complicated variants that an organism needs to make in its environment (Goldstone & Hendrickson, ).  In the auditory modality of speech perception, CP refers to the fact that listeners rapidly map continuous acoustic signals onto discrete phonological categories, resulting in better discrimination of stimuli across the category boundary than of equivalently separated stimuli within the same category (Liberman, Harris, Hoffman & Griffith, ).  While the great bulk of literature on CP deals with the segmental features (i. e.  consonants and vowels) (e. g.  Fry, Abramson, Eimas & Liberman, .  Harnad, .  Johnson & Ralston, .  Liberman, Harris, Kinney & Lane, .  Miller & Eimas, .  Nenonen, Shestakova, Huotilainen & Näätänen, ), there has been a recent surge of research into whether CP applies to the suprasegmental level, such as lexical tone contrasts in tone languages (e. g.  Bent, Bradlow & Wright, .  Bidelman, Gandour & Krishnan, .  Francis, Ciocca & Ng, .  Gandour, Wong & Hutchins, .  Hallé, Chang & Best, .  Peng, Deutsch, Henthorn, Su & Wang, .  Peng, Zheng, Gong, Yang, Kong & Wang, .  Wang, .  Xu, Gandour & Francis, ).  On the whole, studies on the CP of lexical tones in adults have mainly focused on two aspects.  the influence of language experience (cross-language or cross-dialect), and different domains (music vs.  speech vs.  non-speech).  Specifically, for Mandarin tone perception, there is ample evidence that adult Mandarin listeners not only show a sharp boundary (or a steep transition slope) between the level tone and the rising tone in the identification function, but they also exhibit a prominent discrimination peak around the categorical boundary position, indicating a typical CP of these Mandarin tones (e. g.  Peng et al. , .  Wang, .  Xu et al. , ).  Compared to the extensive research on CP in adults, the progressive development of CP of Mandarin tones from infancy into childhood has received relatively little attention (but see Xi, Jiang, Zhang & Shu, .  Yang & Liu, .  Zhang et al. , ).  In a behavioral study by Xi et al.  (), healthy five- to seven-year-old children and adults were tested on the identification of a tone continuum ranging from Mandarin Tone  to Tone .  Their results showed that six-year-old first-graders have already acquired adult-like identification competence for these Mandarin tones.  However, due to the lack of an explicit discrimination test, their results may not be conclusive.  In another behavioral study (Yang & Liu, ), eight Mandarin monolingual children aged from six to eight years (mean = ·) participated in both tone identification and tone discrimination tasks for tone continua between Tone  and Tone , and between Tone  and Tone .  Mandarin monolingual children showed sharp categorical boundaries in the tone identification task.  However, they did not show prominent discrimination peaks around the observed identification boundaries, implying that the discrimination ability of Mandarin tones in six- to eight-year-old children was not as proficient as it was in adults.  Zhang et al. 