 Passive voice is among the most prominent and widespread perspectivechanging constructions in the world’s languages (Abraham & Leisiö, .  Givón, .  Keenan & Dryer, ).  The acquisition of passive forms by children has been the controversial topic of research studies across the last decades (Baldie, .  Messenger, Branigan & Mclean, ).  Passive constructions have been described as delayed in some languages (Gordon & Chafetz, .  Prat-Sala, Shillcock & Sorace, ), and as early acquisitions in others (Allen & Crago, .  Aschermann, Gulzow & Wendt, .  Demuth, Moloi & Machobane, ).  Syntactic, semantic, discourse, cognitive, and usage factors as well as elicitation conditions have been invoked in explaining why young children struggle in comprehending and producing passive forms (Brooks & Tomasello, .  Messenger, .  Pinker, Lebeaux & Frost, ).  The current study aimed to examine the acquisition of passive forms in Hebrew in a new light.  First, focus here is on the MORPHOLOGY of the passive verb.  As general theoretical motivation for this verb-focused investigation, we follow Haspelmath’s (, p.  ) comment that “the verbal morphology associated with a passive construction is an essential part of the construction whose properties are worthy of study in their own right.  Indeed, the passive can be regarded as first and foremost a verbal morphological category whose meaning implies certain changes in the clause structure. ” From a Hebrew-specific typological perspective, studying passive verb morphology in acquisition is key, as Hebrew passive forms are part and parcel of the verb-pattern binyan system, a set of seven conjugations which provide the vocalic form of the verb and its syntactico-semantic category.  Second, previous research on passive acquisition – in Hebrew as in other languages – examined spoken passive constructions in young children, mostly in preschoolers.  In contrast, the current study elicited passive forms in writing from school-going children and adolescents, compared with adults, during the period of Later Language Development (Berman, .  Nippold, ).  This framework enabled us to contextualize the acquisition of passive verbs as part of a set of Hebrew morpho-lexical classes whose learning is delayed to adolescence – a time of when socio-cognitive, linguistic, and literacy abilities connect together in the complex expression of communicative goals (Berman & Ravid, ).  The main goals of the current study were as follows.  (i) to provide an account of the development of Hebrew passive verb morphology across the school years, based on an experimental task.  and (ii) to determine the role of derivational and inflectional binyan morphology in this development.  Passive constructions.  Passive voice seems to be a universal phenomenon.  nonetheless, it has been described as an elusive category, deserving of sound conceptual foundations (Shibatani, ).  Several conclusions come to mind when reviewing the linguistic literature on passive constructions and their functional roles across different languages, which can be useful in laying the background and generating expectations for the current developmental study of Hebrew passives.  First, passives are noted among the most prominent and widespread perspective-changing constructions in the world’s languages (Givón, ).  The general view of passive constructions as backgrounding the agent role while highlighting the patient role is shared among linguists (Myhill, ).  We adopt here Keenan and Dryer’s () analysis of the passive as essentially different from syntactically restricted inversion phenomena such as topicalizing and dislocating constructions.  unlike the former, passive forms are integral to the grammar of languages in occupying unmarked positions and the case marking of NPs, in requiring no specific intonation patterns, and in undergoing all major syntactic operations.  According to Keenan and Dryer, the most distinctive property of passives is the formation of the passive verb phrase (Haspelmath, ).  This supports our focus on the morphology of Hebrew passive verbs in investigating their acquisitional path.  A second observation from the cross-linguistic literature indicates that the notion of ‘passive’ often serves as an umbrella term for a cluster of constructions sharing the perspective of the patient.  Across languages, these include middle voice and impersonal constructions (Abraham & Leiss, ), in addition to get-passives, medial passives, and adjectival passives (Mitkovska & Bužarovska, .  Rathert, ), all participating in different configurations of agent and patient roles in the event.  Viewed from a developmental psycholinguistic perspective, passives constitute one form of voice construction whose function is to depict a non-canonical view on events and situations.  This can generate the expectation that a language learner would need to gain experience not only with variegated communicative events and contexts, but also with the array of agent-demoting constructions and discourse types typically associated with their expression in her language.  A third conclusion drawn from the literature is the strong relationship between transitivity and voice, on the one hand, and between aspect and voice, on the other (Abraham & Leisiö, .  Shibatani, ).  Middle voice constructions tend to express a generic and imperfective outlook, e. g.  these books sell well.  Passive voice, in contrast, prefers a transitive construction that expresses the patient argument in an object NP, with an agentive, volitional grammatical subject and a concrete, actional verb affecting the object, as in the alternation John built the IKEA chest / the IKEA chest was built by John.  No less importantly, expression of canonical passive voice is associated with realis, concrete/agentive transitivity, and perfective temporality (Foley, ).  In a language such as Hebrew, which does not mark aspectual distinctions in verb inflectional morphology, this means a strong association of passive forms with the narrative past tense – unlike telic past, which strongly associates with middle/inchoative semantics (Berman & Slobin, ).  This generates two expectations.  that passivization of abstract, less agentive and objectaffecting Hebrew verbs should be more challenging to children.  and that future tense passive forms should be more difficult to passivize than past tense verbs.  The relationship between resultative predicates and passive verbs has been shown to benefit learning (Lee & Lee, ), but the tense hypothesis, to our best knowledge, has not been tested before.  The acquisition literature (see below) has long known that actional passive constructions are comprehended earlier than non-actional ones (Maratsos, Fox, Becker & Chalkley, ), but testing passive formation in late childhood adolescence makes it possible to examine a much richer array of cognitive and abstract verbs.  Acquisition of passive constructions.  The acquisition of passive forms by children has been the controversial topic of numerous research studies across the last decades regarding the timing of the acquisition of passive forms and the reasons thereof (Budwig, .  Crain, Thornton & Murasugi, ).  Much of the investigation of passive acquisition has focused on English, where it was often described as delayed to age six years in both comprehension and production (Brooks & Tomasello, .  Marchman, Bates, Burkardt & Good, ).  Children were shown to experience particular difficulty when full passives – that is, the whole syntactic structure including the by-phrase – were involved (Fox & Grodzinsky, ).  The realization that the passive is a complex phenomenon with different parts and facets dictates a more nuanced view of passive learning as a drawn-out process of learning.  Many studies have shown that young children start by attending to semantically restricted, prototypical passives – that is, irreversible passives with actional verbs and animate subjects (Ferreira, .  Pinker et al. , ).  Children initially prefer less patient-oriented, agent-demoting devices, such as the get passive or middle voice (Gámez, Shimpi, Waterfall & Huttenlocher, ).  Only later on, beyond age six and even later, does children’s knowledge go beyond the canonical passive (Messenger et al. , ).  Frequency of passive forms and their discourse contexts in the input have often been invoked as determining factors in children’s acquisition of passives (Tomasello, Brooks & Stern, ).  Thus, the rarity of agentless and passive constructions in English input to children (Gordon & Chafetz, ) could explain the discrepancy in reports on timing of acquisition.  Investigations of the early emergence of passive forms (around age two) in languages with prevalent passive constructions such as Bantu languages, Inuktitut, and Quiche Mayan, have ruled out a universal maturational constraint on passive learning (Alcock, Rimba & Newton, .  Allen & Crago, .  Demuth et al. , .  Pye & Quixtan Poz, ).  But children acquiring languages with lower frequencies of passive forms than English, such as Catalan or Hebrew, are reported to continue struggling with passive production even beyond age ten (Prat-Sala et al. , .  Ravid, ).  At the same time, exposure of child and adult participants to passive constructions of all types has been shown to enhance their passive productions (Gámez et al. , ).  Thus, the literature suggests that learners are sensitive to the way the immediate and general linguistic input employs passive constructions in the depiction of different agent-demotingPassive voice in Hebrew.  Syntactically, the active/passive alternation in Hebrew is rather similar to that of English.  Consider the pair of Hebrew sentences in (), which express active (a) and passive (b) voice perspectives on the same event.  () a.  ha-texnay hiklit et ha-re’ayon the-technician recorded ACC the-interview ‘The technician recorded the interview’ b.  ha-re’ayon huklat al-yedey ha-texnay the-interview was-recorded by the-technician ‘The interview was recorded by the technician’ The active version (a) has a grammatical subject depicting the agent ha-texnay ‘the technician’ at sentence-initial position, and a direct object patient ha-re’ayon ‘the interview’ marked by accusative et, following the transitive verb.  In (b), the patient serves as subject at sentence-initial position, followed by the passive verb.  The by-phrase is a crucial test of passive voice in Hebrew, since only truly passive (as opposed to medial passive) constructions can take it.  The scope of the Hebrew passive is notably less broad than in English, as passivization is generally restricted to transitive constructions with direct, sometimes oblique, objects.  Unlike English, Hebrew does not allow passivization of indirect objects in ditransitive constructions such as Mary handed the flowers to John / John was handed the flowers by Mary.  Two language-specific, structural, and functional characteristics render the Hebrew passive very different from that of English, providing grounds for further hypotheses regarding acquisition.  One is its Semitic verb morphology.  another is the prevalence of generic subjectless constructions in Hebrew.  Passive verb morphology.  Like all Hebrew verbs, passive verbs are formed within the binyan system by the Semitic non-linear affixation of root and pattern morphemes.  Semitic roots are discontinuous morphemes consisting of three or four radicals, which constitute the structural and semantic core of Hebrew words in general and verbs in particular, e. g.  root g-d-l ‘grow’ or root t-q-n ‘fix’.  All Hebrew verbs are constructed by combining a root with one of seven verb conjugations termed binyanim (literally ‘buildings’) – traditionally named Qal, Nif’al, Hif’il, Huf’al, Pi’el, Pu’al, and Hitpa’el (based on the root p-’-l ‘act’).  Binyan conjugations provide the main vocalic structure of the verb (sometimes accompanied by prefixation).  For example, Pi’el provides the CiCeC template into which the root (marked by capital Cs) is inserted.  In addition, each binyan consists of a specific bundle of temporal patterns that combine with a root to create its paradigm of temporal stems.  For example, gidel, megadel, and yegadel serve as the respective past, present, and future tense stems of ‘raise’ in Pi’el.  The binyan system not only dictates the morphological structure of verbs, but also how transitivity relations, including passive voice, are expressed syntactically.  Thus, binyan patterns are associated with higher or lower transitivity values, with correspondingly richer or poorer argument structures – e. g.  high-transitivity Hif’il, which is often associated with two or three arguments, or low-transitivity Nif’al, mostly occurring in single-argument structures (Berman, ).  In this respect, Hebrew binyan conjugations differ from Romance verb conjugations, which are morphophonological in nature (Monachesi, ), and are somewhat similar to Slavic verb formation, which is also associated with aspect and Aktsionsart (Svenonius, ).  Hebrew root-based verbs with different binyan patterns constitute semi-productive derivational families combining lexically specific meanings with Aktionsart values such as inchoativity, causativity, reflexivity, reciprocity, middle, and passive voice (see Berman & Nir-Sagiv, , p.  , for a detailed table).  For example, root g-d-l ‘grow’ combines with binyan patterns to create a family of six different verbs – two of which in passive voice.  basic gadal ‘grow’, causative higdil ‘enlarge’, passive hugdal ‘be enlarged’, causative gidel ‘raise’, passive gudal ‘be raised’, and middle-reflexive hitgadel ‘aggrandize oneself’.  Passive verb formation takes place within this morphologically stringent root-binyan verb system.  Hebrew passive morphosyntax is based on the three transitive binyan patterns – Qal, Hif’il, and Pi’el, each associated with a dedicated passive counterpart.  Qal with Nif’al, Hif’il with Huf’al, and Pi’el with Pu’al (Table ).  In the current context, we investigate VERBAL passives, that is, passive verbs in the past and future tense, rather than resultative adjectival passives, which are based on the present tense stems of passive binyan patterns, such as Pu’al metukan ‘fixed’ or Huf’al mufta ‘surprised’ (Berman, ).  Adjectival passives constitute a major structural source of Hebrew adjectives, learned early on, around four years of age (Berman, ).  In one sense, passive morphology is the most predictable of all binyan functions, as choice of passive binyan is always entailed by its active counterpart (Table ).  However, the three patterns expressing passive voice are not uniform – rather, they fall into two distinct groups.  strict passives (Pu’al and Huf’al), and Nif’al.  Pu’al and Huf’al passives share several unique features.  First, the passive voice is their only functional role, so that their existence is predicated on that of a corresponding transitive Hif’il or Pi’el verb.  Structurally, they share the vowel u across their temporal paradigms, and unlike all other binyan patterns, they do not have infinitive forms (Table ).  Again, unlike all other patterns, Pu’al and Huf’al form their action nominals by attaching the abstract suffix -ut to their adjectival present tense stems, e. g.  muxan-ut ‘readi-ness’ or me’orav-ut ‘involve-ment’ (Ravid & Avidor, ).  Importantly, their present tense forms express both passive participial and resultative meanings, so that mefursam in Pu’al can be interpreted as both ‘is being published’ and ‘famous’.  Nif’al, in contrast, has several characteristics that mark its special status (Schwarzwald, ).  First, in addition to its role as the passive counterpart of Qal, it has most of the middle functions of Hitpa’el, serving as the inceptive and inchoative counterpart of Hif’il (Berman, ).  Moreover, and again unlike the strict passives, present tense participial Nif’al participates in a tripartite system with Qal and the resultative pattern CaCuC, as in Qal kotev ‘is writing’ / CaCuC katuv ‘written’ / Nif’al nixtav ‘is being written’.  Structurally, too, Nif’al does not have the typical passive u vowel of the strict passives, and again, unlike them, it has an infinitival stem and a derived action nominal like all other non-passive binyan patterns.  Finally, Nif’al is the only binyan (or for that matter, any derivational pattern in Hebrew) starting with prefixal n-, with a further peculiarity of having identical past and present stems and phonologically distinct future and infinitive stems (Ravid, ).  Hebrew passive formation is firmly embedded in Hebrew verb morphology, using the same structural devices employed for the expression of other binyan functions.  There is nothing special about the morphophonology of either the strict passives or Nif’al.  the developmental literature shows that present tense adjectival passives with u are found in child speech (e. g.  mekulkal ‘out of order’, hafux ‘upside down’).  Moreover, telic Nif’al verbs such as nishpax ‘spilled’ or nirtav ‘got wet’ are among the earliest past tense forms to occur in child speech, with medial passive Hitpa’el forms such as hitparek ‘fell apart’ soon following in their steps (Berman, ).  Therefore, morphological structure alone cannot be the culprit in the very late acquisition of passive voice in Hebrew.  We argue that the problem lies elsewhere, at the interface of syntactic constructions and event structure in the ambient language.  Passive versus generic subjectless constructions.  Hebrew has several subjectless constructions that serve to express a non-agent oriented outlook on events (Berman, ).  Two prominent examples are predicate-first () and impersonal () constructions, which are prevalent in everyday interactions, child speech, and input to children (Dromi & Berman, ).  () a.  mutar lexa laléxet Allowed to-you to-go ‘You may go’ b.  xam po hot here ‘it’s hot here’ () a.  bonim po gesher building,PL here bridge ‘A bridge is under construction here’ b.  lo yimkeru lexa kan glida not will-sell,PL to-you here ice cream ‘They won’t sell you ice cream here’ Constructions such as those in () and () share a general, often modal, discourse stance (Berman, ).  Such subjectless, often verbless, impersonal constructions, usually anchored in the present tense, are prevalent in everyday communication and written discourse, thus occupying the preferred slot for the expression of habitual, generic states, scenarios, and situations in Hebrew.  Hebrew passive constructions are very different.  Like their active counterparts, and in direct contrast to subjectless/verbless constructions, they require a grammatical subject and are based on lexical verbs that take all temporal inflections, favoring the perfective past tense.  By itself, passive syntactic structure cannot be regarded as the cause of delayed passive acquisition in Hebrew, as children produce the required, grammatically integral SV(O) structures (Keenan & Dryer, ) fairly early, including many with non-agentive subjects and unaccusative verbs (Berman, ).  Relating different structures should not be challenging to Hebrew-speaking children, who are early on exposed to and produce sentences with pragmatically alternating word orders such as () (Ravid, ).  () a.  ha-tik nafal / nafal ha-tik the-bag has-dropped / has-dropped the-bag ‘the bag has dropped’ b.  kvar axalti et ha-agas / et ha-agas kvar axalti already ate,ST. SG ACC the-pear / ACC the-pear already ate,ST. SG ‘I already ate the pear’ We argue that the FUNCTIONAL ROLE reserved in Hebrew to passive verb constructions is the gist of the problem.  In direct contrast to generic, present tense, state-oriented subjectless constructions, verbal passives functionally pinpoint highly transitive, perfective EVENTS, either realis or irrealis, as in ().  () a.  af báyit lo shupats be-maha’lax ha-tkufa no house not renovated in-the-course the-period ‘Not a single house was renovated during this period’ b.  im ta’ase kax, lo tenuke me-ashma If will-do,ND. SG that, not will-be-cleaned,ND. SG from-guilt ‘If you do that, you will not be cleared of guilt’ Passive constructions thus require the expression of specific, perfective events through an abstract and distanced agent-demoting stance, which does not characterize early child language interaction.  This restricted functional role predicts a prolonged period of learning passive voice, enabled by socio-cognitive changes in adolescence during Later Language Development (Blakemore & Choudhury, ).  Learning passive constructions in Hebrew is based on gaining extensive experience with the appropriate communicative contexts of event- and story-telling, and the passive constructions associated with them.  and the ability to perceive multiple perspectives, as well as familiarity with literate, written language styles that prefer such forms of expression (Berman & Ravid, ).  Learning Hebrew passives.  Most research on Hebrew passive acquisition to date has focused on its distributions in child, adolescent, and adult corpora.  Verbal passives of Pu’al and Huf’al were virtually absent in spoken mother– child interactions, child-directed speech, child speech, children’s peer talk (Berman, .  Ravid et al. , ), and in children’s spoken personal-experience story-telling (Berman & Slobin, ).  They were also negligible (under %) in the written narrative and expository texts of Hebrew-speaking high-schoolers and even university-educated adults (Berman & Nir-Sagiv, ).  Past tense (no future tense) Pu’al and Huf’al verbs constituted under % of verb types and tokens in children’s story-books and early school texts.  Passive Nif’al past and future tense forms in the same corpora were as sparse.  However, passive verb usage was noted as a prominent high register marker in the expression of detached, abstract discourse stance in adolescent and adult discourse production (Berman & Ravid, .  Ravid & Berman, ), with special concentration in adult narrative writing (Ravid & Chen-Djemal, ).  This supports our hypothesis regarding the special role passive constructions occupy in Hebrew event-telling and the drawn-out route to learning their usage contexts in the language.  Ravid () reviewed several small-scale Hebrew-language experimental studies where past tense passive constructions were elicited in school-aged children.  They all showed that, by age ten, syntactic errors in passive sentences were negligible, but correct production of passive morphology was still at %.  A number of studies that elicited passive forms in morphosyntactic tasks had the same results (Ravid & Geiger, ), showing correct production of passive verb morphology at ceiling only by late adolescence (Ravid & Saban, ).  Relatedly, Ravid and Epel Mashraki () reported strong correlations between passive production, prosodic reading, and reading comprehension in nine-year-olds.  Across all of these studies, Nif’al had the highest correct scores and attracted the most errors, leading us to assume that it constituted the bridge leading towards strict passives, given the prominence of intransitive, telic, and change-of-state Nif’al forms in early childhood (Berman, ).  To sum up, corpora studies indicated the marked absence of passive constructions from spoken and written Hebrew texts, except for the specific, adult preference for narrating events from a distanced discourse stance.  Correspondingly, passive verb production in experimental conditions outlined a learning path starting very late, around age nine, reaching command only by late adolescence.  Given children’s command of Hebrew verb morphology and argument structure in early childhood, we hypothesized that the delay in learning Hebrew passives does not derive from syntactic nor morphological factors, but rather from the rare encounters with Hebrew passive constructions that are the direct outcome of their specific narrative role coupled with a detached and general stance.  Linguistic register.  A critical component of the current study is the notion of LINGUISTIC REGISTER, characterized by Ferguson (, p.  ) as “the linguistic differences that correlate with different occasions of use”.  This means that acquisition of register involves gaining command of the range of expressive options available in the target language, and being able to map relevant linguistic forms in accordance with communicative context (Biber, ).  Moreover, register-sensitive usage is more aligned with the displaced writing mode, which allows for more planning and monitoring, hence more complex linguistic features (Halliday, ).  Accordingly, verbal passives occupied a prominent part of the elevated Hebrew register in Ravid and Berman’s () analysis of text production across adolescence.  Hypotheses in the current study.  Against this background, the current study was the first systematic, large-scale, dedicated study of Hebrew passive elicitation in sentential context to engage school-going populations – children and adolescents – compared with adults.  The passivization task included two new variables studied for the first time, suitable for examining the language of literate participants during the period of Later Language Development.  First, the variable of linguistic REGISTER, that is, language level.  Register was used as a measure of lexical specificity and degree of abstractness of the verb, following the criteria established in Hebrew by Ravid and Berman ().  A second new variable was past versus future verb tense, as against all previous experimental studies on Hebrew passive production which involved past tense, the default form of Hebrew passives.  We had four hypotheses following the literature reviewed above.  () Correct performance on the passive task was expected to increase from the youngest age group to adulthood, across the period of later language development.  () Sentences with active verbs in higher register were expected to incur lower correct scores than those with verbs in neutral register.  () We expected Nif’al to lead correct passive performance, that is, to have the highest scores starting from the lowest age group.  We had no expectations regarding the ordering within the two strict passives Pu’al and Huf’al, as previous studies had shown conflicting results.  () As an irrealis temporal form, future tense is rarely used in referring to events.  Accordingly, we expected higher performance on the canonical past tense verbs.  <Middle>This study was a structured elicitation task testing the production of Hebrew passive voice constructions in writing.  PARTICIPANTS were  typically developing monolingual, native Hebrew-speaking children, adolescents, and adults with no diagnosed language or learning disorders.  They were all of middle SES (socio-economic status), as determined by the Strauss Cultivation Measure (Strauss, .  Ensminger & Fothergill, ). 