I N T R O D U C T I O N.  In learning language, young children face a challenging task.  Not only must they work out what the words they hear mean, but they must also remember these words and their referents.  Given the complexity of the speech that children hear and the limitless potential meanings of these words, this task seems almost impossible (Quine, ), and there has been much interest in the general mechanisms by which children are able to learn words.  For example, children constrain the potential meaning of words they hear according to the shape (Landau, Smith & Jones, ) and taxonomic category (Markman & Hutchinson, ) of potential referents.  Constraining the potential meaning of heard words in these ways is the ﬁrst step towards successful word learning (McMurray, Horst & Samuelson, ).  While a focus on the general mechanisms underlying word learning has helped to better understand the processes by which children acquire language, the vast variability in early language development must also be more thoroughly examined.  At the age of two, the number of diﬀerent words that a child can typically produce as reported by parents can range from  to  (Dale & Fenson, ), and a similarly wide range is demonstrated in two-year-old children’s spontaneous speech production (Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer & Lyons, ).  Nevertheless, the large majority of children with low productive vocabularies will go on to develop language normally (Desmarais, Sylvestre, Meyer, Bairati & Rouleau, .  Kelly, .  Whitehurst & Fischel, ).  Variability in vocabulary scores has been traditionally explored by examining the extrinsic factors that can serve to aﬀect a child’s language exposure, with a particular focus on the eﬀect of socioeconomic status.  Children from poorer backgrounds are consistently shown to have lower vocabularies than their better-oﬀ peers (Evans, ).  While at ﬁrst this eﬀect was understood to be due to diﬀerences in the amount of language to which a child is exposed (Hart & Risely, ), more recent research has emphasized that the quality of early language exposure is also critical (Hirsh-Pasek et al. , ).  While this research has been inﬂuentialhighlighting that the quality of language exposure impacts on language acquisition, there have also been calls for a more thorough examination of the intrinsic factors that aﬀect cognitive development (Mareschal, Johnson, Sirois, Spratling, Thomas & Westermann, ).  Children’s behavioral styles vary widely, yet the eﬀect of these variations is often neglected in explaining language development. 