 Many high-risk, high-consequence technical environments, including air trafﬁc control, hydroelectric power generation, and emergency services, are characterized by time pressure, uncertainty, and dynamic relationships between components (Orasanu & Connolly, 1993).  The safe and efﬁcient management of these environments is reliant upon effective communication between operators, where any communication error has the potential for a signiﬁcant loss (Australian Transport Safety Bureau, 2007).  The process of communication within such domains is inherently a joint activity between communicative partners (Clark, 1994.  Clark & Schaefer, 1989).  Models of dialogue structure, such as the collaborative model (Clark, 1994.  Clark & Brennan, 1991.  Clark & Schaefer, 1987, 1989.  Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986), emphasize that both communicative partners have a shared responsibility to ensure that information exchanged has been appropriately heard and understood before the conversation proceeds.  A communicative exchange involves two distinct stages.  the presentation of information and the grounding of that information (Clark & Schaefer, 1987).  During the presentation stage, the sender will provide information for the receiver to interpret and from which meaning can be derived.  During the grounding stage, the sender and receiver collaborate to ensure that the receiver has understood the sender’s intended message (Clark & Brennan, 1991.  Clark & Schaefer, 1987).  For grounding to take place, the receiver must demonstrate evidence of understanding to the sender, and the sender must accept the evidence as true.  When the process of grounding is successful, the utterance from the sender is referred to as “common ground” between the two communicative participants (Clark & Schaefer, 1987, p.  19).  MISCOMMUNICATION.  Although the objective of any communicative transaction is to ensure mutual understanding between all participants (Dascal & Berenstein, 1987), communication has been identiﬁed as a contributing factor in a signiﬁcant proportion of errors within many high-risk industries (Kim, Park, Han, & Kim, 2010).  For example, Billings and Cheaney (1981) noted that information transfer difﬁculties were a primary factor in over 70% of cases reported to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Aviation Safety Reporting System.  Similarly, Greenberg et al.  (2007) reported that miscommunication contributed to almost a quarter of surgical malpractice claims that led to patient harm.  Miscommunication is the broad term used to encompass the various types of communicative problems that can occur in discourse (Skantze, 2005).  There are two main types of miscommunication.  misunderstandings and nonunderstandings (Hirst, McRoy, Heeman, Edmonds, & Horton, 1994).  In a misunderstanding, receivers are under the incorrect assumption that they have understood the instruction and thus remain unaware that an error in discourse has occurred (Hirst et al. , 1994.  Skantze, 2005).  In contrast, a nonunderstanding refers to instances where a receiver does not obtain any meaningful interpretation of a message or is unable to select from two or more interpretations of a message (Skantze, 2005).  A nonunderstanding involves conscious awareness of a partial or complete lack of understanding and can be disclosed or concealed (Weigand, 1999).  A disclosed nonunderstanding occurs when a receiver fails to understand a message and alerts the sender that the message has not been understood.  In contrast, a concealed nonunderstanding occurs when the receiver fails to understand a message, but deceptively conceals this state of nonunderstanding from the sender (Weigand, 1999).  THE READBACK/HEARBACK COMMUNICATIVE PROTOCOL.  While nonunderstandings can occur in many different types of communicative exchanges, they can also threaten the effectiveness of the readback/hearback protocol.  This is a communications procedure that speciﬁes how verbal instructions are to be delivered and conﬁrmed over the radio/telephone (Prinzo & Britton, 1993).  Used in many different high-risk operational environments, including aviation, electricity transmission control, hydroelectric power generation, and more recently, in some healthcare settings, this protocol is used to reduce operator error and maintain the integrity of communication processes (Prabhakar et al. , 2012.  Prinzo & Britton, 1993).  This four-step protocol is initiated when a sender transmits a verbal message to a receiver (Federal Aviation Administration, 2015, Section 2-4-3).  For example, an air trafﬁc controller might send the following instruction to a pilot.  “Aircraft X, turn left to a heading of zero three zero” (Barshi & Farris, 2013, p.  2).  The receiver is then required to actively listen to the instruction before repeating the instruction verbatim back to the sender (known as the readback).  In the aviation context, a pilot would respond to the air trafﬁc controller with “Turning left to a heading of zero three zero, Aircraft X. ” The sender is then expected to listen to the readback to ensure that it has been repeated correctly, which is referred to as the hearback portion of the exchange (Cushing, 1995.  Prinzo & Britton, 1993.  Prinzo, Hendrix, & Hendrix, 2006).  The main purpose of the readback/hearback loop is to ensure that the receiver has accurately heard the instruction as the sender is able to identify and correct any errors made in the readback during the hearback portion of the exchange (Prinzo & Britton, 1993.  Prinzo et al. , 2006).  For example, if the sender hears the pilot incorrectly read back the instruction as “Turning left to a heading of zero three three, Aircraft X” during the hearback, the sender is expected to correct the misheard heading on the part of the pilot and reinitiate the readback/hearback loop until the correct instruction has been heard.  If a receiver is given an instruction that is not understood, this can be indicated to the sender in lieu of a readback (i. e. , disclosed nonunderstanding), allowing the information to be recommunicated until the instruction becomes common ground between the communicative participants (Streitenberger, Breen-Reid, & Harris, 2006).  Readback/hearback protocol limitation.  Although the readback/hearback protocol is an effective strategy for the identiﬁcation of misunderstandings and disclosed nonunderstandings, it does not necessarily protect against concealed nonunderstandings, because a nonunderstanding can be concealed, despite an accurate readback (Jones, 2003).  Concealed nonunderstandings on the part of the receiver in a readback/hearback exchange may also go undetected by a sender for various reasons.  For example, senders (of any communicative exchange) have a tendency to overestimate the extent to which they have successfully communicated the intended meaning of a message and, therefore, may not anticipate a lack of understanding (Fay, Page, & Serfaty, 2010.  Keysar & Henly, 2002).  Further, receivers may prefer to conceal a lack of understanding to “save face,” especially in those situations where there is an expectation that the instruction would normally be understood (Chiang & Pepper, 2006).  There is also an explicit expectation in many high-risk environments, including aviation, that the receipt of an accurate readback provides evidence to the sender that the message has been understood by the receiver (Federal Aviation Administration, 2014.  Morrow, Rodvold, & Lee, 1994).  Nevertheless, nonunderstandings, in spite of an accurate readback, do occur (Air Accidents Investigation Branch, 2008.  Billings & Cheaney, 1981.  Morrow et al. , 1994).  This suggests that the delivery of an accurate readback from a receiver does not necessarily provide the sender with adequate evidence during the grounding process to indicate that mutual understanding has taken place.  Reliance on auditory cues to gauge understanding.  The identiﬁcation of effective strategies that could improve the detection of nonunderstandings during the grounding process of readback/hearback exchanges is an important step in improving the integrity of this communication system.  For grounding to take place within a communicative exchange, the collaborative model suggests that the sender will rely on evidence from the receiver’s utterance to gauge whether or not the message has been understood as intended (Clark & Brennan, 1991).  Because the readback/hearback protocol takes place primarily over the radio/telephone, this evidence can only be derived from auditory cues, including the linguistic cues within the speech (the syllables, words, or phrases of an utterance) and the prosodic cues inherent in vocal communication (Drummond & Hopper, 1991.  Kanki & Smith, 2001.  Nygaard, Herold, & Namy, 2009.  Soskin, 1953).  Prosodic cues refer to the range of paralinguistic characteristics of the voice, such as tempo and intonation, that inﬂuence how something is said (Bolinger, 1985).  In the absence of visual cues, operators working in domains that rely on radio communication are exclusively dependent on linguistic and prosodic cues to determine levels of understanding.  Auton, Wiggins, Searle, Loveday, and Xu Rattanasone (2013) were the ﬁrst to investigate whether particular prosodic cues, when contained within a full readback spoken by a receiver, were salient to a sender (i. e. , listener of a readback) to gauge the extent to which the receiver had understood the instruction during the grounding process.  Using electricity transmission control as a context, Auton et al.  (2013) asked network operators to listen to a series of auditory-only, simulated readback/hearback communicative exchanges.  During each exchange, participants heard a sender delivering an instruction to a receiver, followed by the receiver delivering an accurate readback to the sender.  Auton et al.  systematically manipulated three prosodic cues contained within the readback (speciﬁcally, ﬁnal intonation, ﬁller, and interturn delay), to determine whether these cues signalled to a participant (i. e. , “listener”), the extent to which a receiver (i. e. , “speaker”) had understood an instruction.  These speciﬁc prosodic cues were derived from Brennan and Williams (1995) who examined the role of prosody during perceptions of uncertainty.  After listening to each exchange, participants were asked to rate the extent to which they perceived the receiver had understood the instruction based on the way the readback had been spoken.  Intonation is generally understood as the pitch patterns of a spoken utterance or the “melody” of speech, where there is a basic division between tunes falling in pitch (i. e. , falling intonation) and those rising in pitch (i. e. , rising intonation.  Bolinger, 1985.  Cruttenden, 1981.  Denes & Milton-William, 1962.  Hunter, 2004.  O’Connor & Arnold, 1961).  Interturn delay refers to the duration of silence between the end of one speaker’s utterance and the beginning of the other speaker’s response (Roberts, Francis, & Morgan, 2006).  An unﬁlled interturn delay refers to a delay that only contains silence, whereas a ﬁlled interturn delay refers to a delay that contains a ﬁller (a speech interjection, such as uh or um.  Clark & Fox Tree, 2002.  Goldman-Eisler, 1961).  Auton et al.  (2013) observed that the prosodic cues of ﬁnal intonation and ﬁller, when contained within the readback portion of the exchange, had the capacity to signal to a listener a receiver’s state of understanding.  In ﬁnal intonation, participants perceived that the receiver had a lower level of understanding of the instruction when the readback ended with rising intonation in comparison to falling intonation.  For ﬁller, participants perceived readbacks that were preceded by the ﬁller um as signaling a relatively lower level of understanding on the part of the receiver, compared to readbacks that were not preceded by a ﬁller.  Even though the duration of interturn delay had been found to be a useful cue during perceptions of uncertainty (Brennan & Williams, 1995), no association between perceptions of nonunderstanding and the duration of interturn delays was evident.  Utility of the linguistic content of the readback response to gauge understanding.  Although Auton et al.  (2013) demonstrated that particular prosodic cues were useful to network operators in detecting varying levels of understanding on the part of the receiver when a full readback was articulated, they did not consider whether such cues would be relied upon when a receiver responded with a partial readback.  In a partial readback response, the receiver does not repeat all the information in the instruction provided by the sender and, therefore, provides the sender with less linguistic evidence that an instruction has been understood (Barshi & Farris, 2013).  It is unclear from Auton et al. 