I N T R O D U C T I O N.  A large volume of research has been conducted over the last century to understand fully the development of interrogative forms and functions in English-speaking children (see Chouinard, , for a review).  However, Mandarin Chinese, the most widely spoken language in the world (Graddol, ), has not been equally empirically explored.  Recently, there have been Chinese studies examining the development of interrogative forms in L children (Fahn, .  Zhou, ), and forms (Ding, .  Gao, .  Yuan, ) and functions (Wang, .  Yuan, .  Zhu & Wu, ) in L learners.  However, very few were conducted with representative samples to establish the developmental norms or patterns of interrogative form and function in Mandarin Chinese.  We have already conducted a corpus-based study on early question acquisition in Cantonese-speaking young children in Hong Kong (Li, Tse, Wong, Wong & Leung, ).  Mandarin Chinese, however, differs greatly from Cantonese in terms of lexicon, syntax, and pronunciation (Tse & Li, ) and therefore deserves a similar study.  In addition, the Mandarin-speaking children in the present study have a monolingual language environment in Beijing, whereas their counterparts in Hong Kong thrive in a ‘trilingual and biliterate’ society (Li & Rao, ).  Comparing their acquisition of interrogative forms and functions can provide some cross-linguistic evidence for the effects of language environments.  This study is thus aimed at filling the gap in the literature.  Another objective of this study is to examine further the cross-linguistic universality of the Information Requesting Mechanism (IRM) proposed by Chouinard ().  Having reviewed all the studies on the early acquisition of English questions, Chouinard hypothesized that request for information (RfI) might be the universal and dominant function of children’s question.  This hypothesis, however, was challenged by our previous study on early child Cantonese in  children aged , , and  months (Li et al. , ), which found that request for action (RfA) rather than RfI might be the dominant interrogative function.  This inconsistent finding was regarded as the result of the cultural difference between Cantonese- and English-speaking young children (Li et al. , ).  But it might also be caused by the age differences in samples or the linguistic differences between English and Cantonese.  To verify this cultural influence, we need to conduct a similar study on Mandarin Chinese using samples that share the same Chinese culture and communication task but speak different languages.  Therefore, in this study, we thoroughly examine the interrogatives elicited from a similar early child Mandarin corpus and empirically explore the factors influencing the early acquisition of interrogatives in order to determine whether the IRM is applicable to Mandarin Chinese.  Development of interrogative forms in Mandarin Chinese.  Mandarin Chinese has a very complex interrogative system, which is composed of a large number of members.  question words (i. e.  ‘what’, ‘who’), question forms (i. e.  the ‘A-not-A’ construction), question mood particle (i. e.  ma), and intonation (Gao, ).  The various combinations of these members could make a question ambiguous and even controversial for Chinese speakers, and even linguists, in terms of the scope of questioning, the degree of question mood, and the degree of grammaticalization of various question forms.  This could easily lead to misunderstanding and miscommunication (Gao, ) and make the acquisition of interrogative forms a really challenging task (Gao, ) for young Mandarin-speaking children.  The Chinese interrogative form is challenging not only for young children but also for linguists, who have not achieved any consensus on a typology (Gao, .  Matthews & Yip, .  Ross & Ma, .  Tse & Li, ).  Liing () identified four major interrogative forms.  particle questions, ‘háishì’ questions, ‘A-not-A’ questions, and wh-questions.  Also, Chinese linguists have explored A-not-A questions in different syntactic contexts (Cheng, ), and their modularity and forms (Huang, .  Hsieh, ).  In this study, we adopted the most comprehensive and systematic typology, which was proposed by Matthews and Yip (), as it has been verified by our previous corpus-based studies on early child Cantonese (Tse & Li, .  Li et al. , ).  As Cantonese has many more interrogative forms than Mandarin Chinese (Li et al. , .  Li, Wong, Tse, Leung, & Ye, ), we used the eight forms commonly shared by Cantonese and Mandarin interrogatives to allow a cross-linguistic comparison between Cantonese and Mandarin interrogatives (for details, please see ‘Coding of the interrogatives’ below).  Currently, the most common topic for early interrogative studies concerns wh-questions in Mandarin Chinese.  Fahn () studied the acquisition of monoclausal wh-questions and found that subject wh-questions were much easier to learn than object wh-questions for Chinese children aged between four and six years.  Zhou () found that young children exhibited an adultlike sensitivity to the licensing environments for the non-interrogative use of wh-words.  Su, Jin, Wan, Zhang, and Su () found that young children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) could understand the question readings rather than the statement readings of wh-words.  Also, there have been other wh-question studies on L–L transfer and comparison among Japanese speakers (Yuan, ) and English speakers (Yuan, ), and on different strategies for the acquisition of different interrogative forms (Gao, ). 