INTRODUCTION.  Over the past six decades, sociolinguistic research has correlated linguistic variation with many aspects of social behavior.  characteristics of the speakers, of interaction with the listeners, and with the speech situation more generally.  This systematic social variability of form is generally said to have social meaning, hence to be available for social expression.  The ﬁrst quantitative study of a sound change (Labov 1963) showed that locally-constructed social meaning, furthermore, can serve as motivation for sound change.  With the accumulation of survey, ethnographic, and case-study evidence, and with the increasing diversity and sophistication of experimental and statistical methods, the study of sociolinguistic variation is engaging ever more deeply with social meaning.  Our aim in this paper is to explore and clarify the notion of social meaning in variation, its role in phonological change, and its locus in the phonological system.  We argue that social meaning accrues to concrete sounds – to phonetic elements – and not to the phonological structures in which those sounds participate.  For the purposes of this discussion, we define meaning as the conventional association of distinctions in the world with distinctions in linguistic form.  In other words, variables are signs.  Peirce (1931–1935) distinguishes three kinds of signs on the basis of the relation between form and content.  symbols by pure convention, icons by resemblance, and indexes by association in fact.  The indexical realm is based in contiguity within the speech situation, as form ‘points to’ the immediate context from the speaker’s perspective.  While this pointing may serve a referential function, as in the case of spatial and temporal deictics, sociolinguistic variables have no referential function. 1 In the case of morpho-syntactic variables (e. g.  negative concord), the presence of negation is referential, but variation in the number of negative particles is used as an intensifier.  that is, the degree of investment the speaker is making for this proposition (Labov 1984b).  In this case, variation imbues a referential sign with additional, indexical, meaning.  In the case of some lexico-pragmatic variables, such as the use of totally with non-gradable predicates, the semantics of the sign may actually contribute to its indexical potential (Acton and Potts 2014.  Beltrama 2016).  In this paper, we deal exclusively with phonological variation, whose indexicality is entirely independent of reference.  The double articulation of language (Hockett 1960.  Martinet 1968), in which phonology provides meaningless elements to combine to yield meaningful elements, leaves phonological units free to register distinctions in the collective co-existence that is the social world.  We commonly refer to the meaning of variation as ‘social meaning. ’ But in an important sense, all meaning is social inasmuch as it is constructed for the purposes of, and in the course of, social exchange.  The distinction between child and adult is based on conventional notions of what makes someone a child or an adult – notions based in shared understandings of age and development. 2 Even the distinction between a table and a bench is social inasmuch as it is based in conventional understandings of the differential characteristics and uses of these objects.  These conventions will change over time as our needs, activities etc.  affect the distinctions we live by.  While all symbols are social in this sense that they are socially constructed, the meaning of variation is purely social.  It has no reference – it does nothing but index something about the speaker as a social actor in the speech situation.  It is this indexical association that we refer to when we speak of social meaning.  There can be variation without social meaning – a difference in form becomes a sign through a process of enregisterment, as it becomes conventionally associated with some social distinction.  The term ‘enregisterment,’ as introduced by Agha (2003) in the context of the emergence of RP, is most commonly associated with a higher level sign – a register (e. g.  Johnstone, Andrus and Danielson 2006).  Variables become enregistered in the give and take of discourse, as hearers construe a relation between form and some aspect of the speaker in the situation, such as stance (Kiesling 2005) or qualities (Eckert 2016).  Macro-social correlations (i. e.  class, age, gender, ethnicity, geography) are not in themselves indications of social meaning, inasmuch as it is possible for such correlations to be well below the level of social awareness (see, e. g. , Tamminga 2016).  But they do indicate a probability that such meaning is at work at the local level.  For example, gender correlations on a macro-social scale point to the culturally central male-female distinction, which in turn abstracts over a range of globally constrained but locally constructed practices and potentials.  Thus, correlation of a variable with a gender category is likely to index that category only indirectly (Ochs 1991), in virtue of some immediately salient quality that is commonly associated with that gender category, such as refinement, toughness, emotionality or trendiness. 