I N T R O D U C T I O N.  In learning language, young children face a challenging task.  Not only must they work out what the words they hear mean, but they must also remember these words and their referents.  Given the complexity of the speech that children hear and the limitless potential meanings of these words, this task seems almost impossible (Quine, ), and there has been much interest in the general mechanisms by which children are able to learn words.  For example, children constrain the potential meaning of words they hear according to the shape (Landau, Smith & Jones, ) and taxonomic category (Markman & Hutchinson, ) of potential referents.  Constraining the potential meaning of heard words in these ways is the ﬁrst step towards successful word learning (McMurray, Horst & Samuelson, ).  While a focus on the general mechanisms underlying word learning has helped to better understand the processes by which children acquire language, the vast variability in early language development must also be more thoroughly examined.  At the age of two, the number of diﬀerent words that a child can typically produce as reported by parents can range from  to  (Dale & Fenson, ), and a similarly wide range is demonstrated in two-year-old children’s spontaneous speech production (Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer & Lyons, ).  Nevertheless, the large majority of children with low productive vocabularies will go on to develop language normally (Desmarais, Sylvestre, Meyer, Bairati & Rouleau, .  Kelly, .  Whitehurst & Fischel, ).  Variability in vocabulary scores has been traditionally explored by examining the extrinsic factors that can serve to aﬀect a child’s language exposure, with a particular focus on the eﬀect of socioeconomic status.  Children from poorer backgrounds are consistently shown to have lower vocabularies than their better-oﬀ peers (Evans, ).  While at ﬁrst this eﬀect was understood to be due to diﬀerences in the amount of language to which a child is exposed (Hart & Risely, ), more recent research has emphasized that the quality of early language exposure is also critical (Hirsh-Pasek et al. , ).  While this research has been inﬂuentialhighlighting that the quality of language exposure impacts on language acquisition, there have also been calls for a more thorough examination of the intrinsic factors that aﬀect cognitive development (Mareschal, Johnson, Sirois, Spratling, Thomas & Westermann, ).  Children’s behavioral styles vary widely, yet the eﬀect of these variations is often neglected in explaining language development.  One intrinsic factor that has, however, been shown to aﬀect early language acquisition is temperament (Slomkowski, Nelson, Dunn & Plomin, ), speciﬁcally shyness (Coplan & Evans, ).  There have been many attempts to operationalize the construct of shyness in young children, from general constructs such as behavioral inhibition as studied in young infants (Kagan, Reznick & Snidman, ), to more speciﬁc conceptualizations focusing on the speciﬁc shy-type behaviors exhibited in certain contexts (e. g.  peer-to-peer interactions.  Gazelle, ).  The current work draws on a broader deﬁnition of shyness, based on Putnam, Gartstein, and Rothbart’s () operationalization of shyness as an enduring, biologically based individual diﬀerence characterized by discomfort in (predominantly novel) social situations, as measured via the Early Childhood Behavior Questionnaire (ECBQ).  Reports on use of the ECBQ have shown that shyness can be reliably measured in children from the age of  months (Putnam et al. , ).  The eﬀect of shyness on verbal communication has been well documented.  for example, it is known that shyness reduces children’s verbal interaction in novel and familiar contexts (e. g.  Asendorpf & Meier, ).  While this and similar research has established a clear link between shyness and language development, the effect of shyness on language has typically been measured relatively late in development, when children are at least four years old (Asendorpf & Meier, .  Broberg, Lamb, Hwang & Bookstein, .  Coplan & Weeks, .  Crozier & Badawood, .  Crozier & Perkins, .  Evans, .  Reynolds & Evans, ).  Recently, however, interest has turned to the effect of shyness on the critical early stage of language acquisition during the second year of life (Smith Watts et al. , ).  Smith Watts and colleagues examined how shyness impacts on receptive and productive language development, and reported that shyness is more strongly related to expressive than receptive vocabulary size.  These authors argued that shy children’s lower language ability during the second year of life can be explained in terms of a reticence to respond, rather than any difficulty in learning the meaning of words.  Shy children’s reticence to respond has been demonstrated in home settings (Reynolds & Evans, ) and in experimental settings (Crozier & Perkins, ), and it is also supported by research in non-Western cultures (Crozier & Badawood, ).  One critical limitation of the extant literature in support of a reticence to respond explanation is that it does not predict an effect of shyness on receptive vocabulary.  However, there are many reports of a relation between shyness and receptive vocabulary (Crozier & Badawood, .  Crozier & Hostettler, .  Crozier & Perkins, .  Rudasill, Prokasky, Tu, Frohn, Sirota & Molfese, .  Slomkowski et al. , .  Spere, Schmidt, Theall-Honey & Martin-Chang, ).  Interestingly, even Smith Watts and colleagues () found relations between receptive vocabulary and shyness, but they argued that their data supported a reticence to respond explanation because the relations between shyness and productive vocabulary were more pronounced.  Here we suggest that further insights into the ways in which shyness affects language development can be achieved by investigating the role of shyness in the processes that support word learning.  Laboratory examinations of children’s “remarkable” ability to acquire words during the second year of life often employ fast mapping tasks that demonstrate the ability to rapidly associate novel labels with novel objects (Axelsson, Churchley & Horst, .  Halberda, .  Horst & Samuelson, .  Horst, Samuelson, Kucker & McMurray, .  Spiegel & Halberda, .  Vlach & Sandhofer, ).  In these tasks, children are usually presented with a novel object alongside objects for which a label is already known and are asked to identify the object referred to by a novel pseudoword (e. g.  “Where’s the blicket. ”.  Markman & Wachtel, ).  Children begin to demonstrate the ability to pick the novel object from the age of  months (Markman, Wasow & Hansen, ), and more recent work indicates that some children may do this as early as  months (Xu, Cote & Baker, ).  Nevertheless, a closer look at the literature reveals considerable individual differences in fast mapping ability.  For example, in a study investigating the age-related development of fast mapping, Wilkinson, Ross, and Diamond () classed % of the under -month-old children in their experiment as unreliable fast mappers.  In other studies -month-old children selected the novel object only on approximately three-quarters of trials (Horst & Samuelson, .  Twomey, Ranson & Horst, ).  Similarly, in a study by Mervis and Bertrand () with –-monthold children, half of the children did not reliably select the novel object upon hearing a novel label.  Critically, children’s selection of the novel object as the referent of a novel label has been attributed to a novelty bias, which is so strong at  months that it leads children to select the novel object as the referent of even a familiar word (Samuelson, Kucker & Spencer, ).  Even at  months of age, children reliably select a familiar target object (Horst & Samuelson, ), but they also select a novel object as the referent of a novel label when competitors are nameless but pre-familiarized objects (Horst et al. , ), demonstrating the importance of novelty preference in driving children’s object selection on referent selection trials.  Individual differences in performance on referent selection trials may therefore be explained in terms of differences in novelty preference.  That novelty preference is critical in supporting referent selection would indicate that shyness could come to bear on this ability, because we know that shy children are averse to novelty (Kagan et al. , ).  This aversion to novelty could mean that shy children’s novelty preference is reduced in comparison to not-shy children.  Even once the novel object is selected as the referent of a novel word, this novel word–object mapping is not necessarily learned.  A number of studies have argued that children’s ability to select the correct referent and the ability to retain the label–object mapping over a period of time are governed by related, but separate, processes (Axelsson et al. , .  Horst & Samuelson, .  Kucker, McMurray & Samuelson, .  Munro, Baker, McGregor, Docking & Arciuli, ).  In tests of retention, children are presented with (usually three) objects for which they have fast mapped novel labels and are asked for one of these objects using its novel label.  Despite success in forming the initial word–object mappings, children often have difficulty retaining these mappings.  For example, in one typical study Horst and Samuelson () found that after a -minute delay, -month-old children were unable to select the correct object above levels that would be expected by chance.  We know that extrinsic factors can affect whether a mapping is retained.  Horst and Samuelson () found that by reinforcing the mapping by ostensively naming the object (e. g.  by pointing and labeling) after the child had made the initial word–object mapping, the likelihood that it would be retained was increased.  This finding suggested that attention to the referent during referent selection determines whether the novel word– object mapping will be retained, supported by subsequent work which found that highlighting the target object by illuminating it and dampening attention to competitors by partially covering them also increased retention (Axelsson et al. , ).  This work suggested that the attention directed toward the target during referent selection alone is not sufficient to support retention.  Again, then, shy children’s aversion to novelty could modulate their attentional pattern across the objects during referent selection, which would impact on their retention of any word–object mappings.  Children are clearly variable in their demonstration of the mechanisms that support word learning, and we suggest that shyness could explain some of this variability.  If shyness impacts on the most basic and early processes of word learning, this could help to explain the relation between shyness and language development as measured more generally (e. g.  Spere et al. , ).  Specifically, one can assume that children who are better able to focus their attention on the novel object during labeling should be better able to retain the word–object mapping.  We hypothesize that shyness can affect retention of novel word–object mappings formed via referent selection by modulating children’s attention during referent selection.  Such a hypothesis is in line with recent accounts arguing that differences in engagement with objects can explain differences in word learning and categorization of these objects (e. g.  Perry, ).  If shy children demonstrate lower levels of retention than their not-shy peers, it would mean that shyness is affecting the acquisition of language from one of its earliest stages.  the initial mapping of a label to its referent.  Such a fine-grained analysis of the effects of shyness on the formation of label– object mappings, rather than focusing solely on vocabulary size or language production, means that we can begin to understand the precise ways in which language is shaped by shyness.  In the present study, two-year-old children took part in both referent selection and retention tests of mapping novel labels to novel objects. 