INTRODUCTION.  Compared to avenues for linguistic variation like accent, spelling, or word choice, the indexical potential of script has only recently become a topic of empirical inquiry.  This is not necessarily surprising, as script selection is rare or even non-existent in many languages.  In English, for example, distinct populations with contrasting pronunciations, spelling standards, and/or vocabulary preferences are still united in their use of the Roman script.  However, a growing body of research has evidenced many cases where selection from competing scripts can become a target of metalinguistic discussion and socially meaningful use (Sebba 2009, 2012).  In actions like the development of the Deseret alphabet by Mormons in America, the rejection of imposed scripts and/or celebration of native scripts by writers of Korean or Cherokee, and even in the adoption of the German-associated Blackletter by English-speaking heavy metal bands to index militarism or machismo, we see clear examples of script acting as a marker of distinct social groups and/or ideologically associated traits (Bender 2008.  Brown and Yeon 2015.  Harkness 2015.  Spitzm€uller 2012, 2015.  Thompson 1982).  The indexical potential of script selection is particularly interesting when discussing written Japanese.  In most writing systems, script selection is somewhat analogous to dialect, as distinct communities utilize distinct methods of producing the same language (Unseth 2005).  For instance, many languages spoken in India are written in multiple scripts, but an author generally uses a single script exclusively when writing a text (Choksi 2014).  The contemporary Japanese writing system departs from this script/dialect analogy, as it instead necessitates the combined use of multiple scripts within a sentence.  In particular, three scripts known as kanji, hiragana, and katakana are found within almost any contemporary text not written for children.  Although the use of the three scripts generally follows codified standards, almost any element of the Japanese language can be (and, indeed, has been) written in each script (Konno 2015).  Consequently, the Japanese writing system allows for variation in script use on a ‘scale which is inconceivable in the case of more familiar [to Western readers] writing systems’ (Backhouse 1984.  220).  This provides potential for meaningful and systematic variations in ‘saying the same thing’ (Silverstein 1985.  222) which is difficult, if not impossible, to observe in other languages.  My goal in this study is to further our understanding of how variant uses of kanji, hiragana, and katakana can be part of the creation of a ‘total linguistic fact’ (Silverstein 1985.  220).  That is, an unpredictable, layered, contextdependent, and ideologically mediated linguistic unit that is co-constructed by the denotational (i. e.  conventional or dictionary-literal) and indexical meaning(s) of linguistic signs (Blommaert 2016.  Wortham 2010).  To do so, I investigate variation in the script(s) which represent first person pronouns throughout the dialogue of adult characters in the Japanese manga (‘comic’) Usagi Doroppu (‘Bunny Drop’).  More specifically, I identify and compare consistent links between script/pronoun combinations and definable speaker identities and styles of self-presentation to shed light on how each script’s indexical field influences if, when, and where the author represents a pronoun in hiragana, katakana, or kanji.  Analysis of the script selection is supplemented by a stimulated recall interview conducted with the manga’s author.  Ultimately, the representation of pronouns in Usagi Doroppu is found to involve both contrasting norms that separate major character identities and temporary variants which index locally non-normative styles of self presentation.  The specifics of each norm’s design and use also shows that script selection can serve as a location for observing the influence of linguistic ideologies on how dialogue is constructed in Japanese.  However, before discussing the data or findings in further detail, it is necessary to first explain the particulars of script and script selection in Japanese writing.  The following section will provide this summary, and in doing so establish why investigation of Japanese script selection is still necessary despite prior discussion of the topic.  SCRIPT AND SCRIPT SELECTION IN CONTEMPORARY JAPANESE WRITING.  As mentioned, the three primary scripts used in contemporary written Japanese are known as kanji, hiragana, and katakana.  Of the three scripts, kanji is by far the oldest and most complex.  Contemporary written Japanese uses thousands of distinct kanji, with each morphosyllabic character usually representing sound and meaning simultaneously (Matsunaga 1996).  As an example, in the construction これは紙です(kore wa kami desu, ‘this is paper’) the kanji 紙both represents the morae kami and means ‘paper’.  the kanji both signifies sound and distinguishes the morae from other homographs.  In contemporary Japan, kanji are primarily used to represent nouns of Japanese or Chinese origin, and the non-inflectional stems of most verbs and adjectives (Seeley 2000).  Hiragana and katakana are instead phonetic scripts developed in Japan.  Both consist of corresponding sets of 46 characters which represent individual morae in Japanese phonology.  In contrast to kanji, individual hiragana and katakana therefore do not possess clear meaning outside of the context of a language act.  For instance, three options for writing the morae kami are the previously mentioned kanji 紙, the hiragana かみ, and the katakana カミ.  While the kanji representation is almost certain to mean ‘paper’, the other options could represent the words ‘paper’, ‘hair’, ‘god’, or a number of other homographs which would require distinct kanji (髪and 神for ‘hair’ and ‘god’, respectively).  Currently, the major role of hiragana is to represent grammatical particles and the inflectional elements of a sentence, while katakana most commonly represents loanwords from languages other than Chinese (Konno 2014a).  Both scripts are also used to represent onomatopoeia, and to replace kanji considered difficult to read or write.  While the use of multiple scripts in Japanese is therefore far from chaotic, the major applications of each script are actually better described as conventions rather than rules (Konno 2014a).  Some conventions, like the use of hiragana for particles and inflection, are quite rigid.  However, there is not necessarily a definitive or ‘best’ representation for many individual words, and variant selections are often better described as ‘uncommon’ than ‘wrong’ (Konno 2014b).  Consequently, authors are allowed some individuality in their script use, and orthographic variation stands as ‘a major characteristic of the Japanese writing system’ (Joyce, Hodoscek and Nishina 2012.  269) even within standard writing.  In more creative or flexible styles/mediums of writing (e. g.  manga, advertising, online communication), script variation can be even further pronounced, as the fact that any script can technically represent almost any word opens the door for a wide variety of creative play (Gottlieb 2010.  Robertson 2015).  Table 1 shows three examples.  Speaking broadly, researchers have established two major motives for the selection of unconventional or uncommon script variants in Japanese.  The first is a desire or need for legibility-related changes.  For instance, authors may use an otherwise unusual representation to draw attention to a word, avoid kanji with unpleasant meanings, adjust their text composition in consideration of the literacy level of their readers, or clarify word boundaries when orthographic norms would cause one script to dominate a sentence (Akizuki 2005.  Gottlieb 2005).  These recognized sources of script variation are not the focus of the current study, but must be considered as potential explanations for any interesting script use found in written Japanese.  The second major reason for script selection, and the one of interest to this study, is that authors sometimes vary their script use in relation to the meaning of a word or sentence.  That is, authors select ‘a particular script type for the “feeling” it evokes’ (Kess and Miyamoto 1999.  108), with each ‘feeling’ arising from links1 between a script, its historical or contemporary uses or users, and culturally associated traits.  For example, the kanji script was once mostly restricted to the domain of educated, upper-class males.  Even today, it is still seen as a symbol of maturity and erudition.  Consequently, its marked use is frequently argued to make writing have an old-fashioned, masculine, formal, or scholarly feel (Brown 1985.  Tsuboi 2003).  Hiragana-heavy texts are instead viewed as feminine, cute, gentle, or childish (Akizuki 2005.  Miyake 2007), as hiragana was historically the primary script used by women writers, and is currently the first script learned by Japanese children (Hirose 2007.  Yoda 2000).  Finally, the nonstandard use of katakana is said to be able to evoke a foreign or modern feel due to the script’s major role of representing loan words (Tomoda 2009.  Tranter 2008).  While it should be recognized that many descriptions of each script come from the assertions of individuals rather than empirical analysis, a sizeable body of psycholinguistic research has evidenced that the listed impressions (insho), feelings (kimochi), effects (koka), or images (imeji) of each script – to borrow the terms used across the cited works – exist in the minds of native speakers and can influence their script use under experimental conditions (Hirose 2007.  Iwahara, Hatta and Maehara 2003.  Ukita et al.  1996).  However, the widespread recognition of the idea that native speakers of Japanese view each script differently belies a lack of systematic and contextsensitive empirical investigation into how and why these images manifest in variant uses of kanji, hiragana, and katakana in natural (i. e.  not produced for the purpose of research) texts.  Most studies which touch on the topic are more broadly interested in identifying differences in script use between writers/ genres via script proportion analysis.  Generally speaking, these studies contain clear uses of script which cannot be attributed to legibility-related concerns, but their analysis of how the selection of a particular script creates meaning is constrained by a few reoccurring limitations.  The most common limitation in prior research is a nearly exclusive interest in nonstandard uses of katakana.  The focus on katakana is understandable.  Purposeful selection of hiragana and kanji can be hard to identify because the scripts possess some overlapping roles (Usami 2004).  Furthermore, the (perceived) increase in katakana/loan words in Japanese writing has long been a subject of debate and controversy in Japan (Tomoda 2009.  Twine 1991).  Still, the lack of attention to variant use of all three scripts prevents us from fully accessing if and how multiple representations contrast and interact to index meaning across a text or texts (Masuji 2011).  The second major limitation is that analysis of what individual selections of script are intended to convey is rarely based on systematic trends evidenced within texts written by a single author.  Instead, potential uses of script for effect are taken from works written by multiple authors with potentially clashing script preferences, and/or presented out of context in tables or as individual words.  This forces the motives for any particular selection to be analyzed through attending to a researcher’s individual conception of a script’s indexical field, the types of words being represented in a nonstandard manner, or demographic differences between authors/audiences (e. g.  Joyce, Hodoscek and Nishina 2012.  Rowe 1981.  Satake 1989).  While often persuasive, these explanations are not rooted in clear divides between the local contexts where a single author uses different scripts to represent the same item(s).  Consequently, the explanations may inadvertently overlook nuances of what caused the selection, similar to how traditional descriptions of venues for variation originating in Japanese speech (e. g.  the use of honorific variants (keigo), ‘women’s language’ (onna kotoba), or pronoun selection) have been found to inexactly describe the diversity of reasons why individuals use or avoid certain lexical variants and/or grammatical forms (Agha 1998.  Cook 2011.  Moskowitz 2014, 2015).  Finally, since previous studies almost always identified marked script use by referencing published guidelines for script use in standard Japanese (Masuji 2011), there is a possibility that locally normative language use has been treated as marked (Davila 2012), or that meaningful locally nonstandard variants have been overlooked due to chance alignment with standard language use (Bucholtz and Hall 2005).  In making these pointed critiques, I do not intend to dismiss the contributions of prior research to the field.  The limitations discussed so far are often due to script use for effect being only an ancillary element of studies with other primary interests, and this study would be impossible without the fundamental finding that some script variation must be attributed to associations authors hold with kanji, hiragana, and katakana.  Rather, the intent of my critique is to establish why the role of script selection in indexing meaning in Japanese writing needs further study despite the basic concept seeing decades of recognition.  While there is no doubt that hiragana, katakana, and kanji can function as indexes, there is much that remains unknown about the specifics of how and why (i. e.  for what purposes) this occurs, with systematic and context-sensitive analysis necessary to further our understanding of the phenomenon.  <Middle> DATA SOURCE AND METHODOLOGY.  The primary data for this study comes from the dialogue throughout the nine primary volumes of the manga series Usagi Doroppu (‘Bunny Drop’) (Unita 2006, 2007a, 2007b, 2008, 2009a, 2009b, 2010a, 2010b, 2011).  The manga medium was selected as a data source for two primary reasons.  The first is the popularity of manga in Japan.  Although manga are described as Japanese comics, it is important to establish that they are a ‘critical part of the [Japanese] culture industry’ (Prough 2010.  56).  Yearly sales of manga are over three times larger than those of comics in America and Canada combined (Oricon 2012.  Virtue 2015), and the medium reaches such a high level of mainstream acceptance that even official government communications, corporate histories, classical works of literature, and educational texts can be found in manga form (Kinsella 1996.  Schwartz and Rubinstein-Avila 2006).  This substantial popularity of manga makes them a linguistically influential medium, with many noted trends in both speech and writing thought to have been spread or popularized by the language used by protagonists of popular titles (Nakamura 2007.  Ueno 2006.  Unser-Schutz 2010, 2013).  Consequently, manga serve as a valuable site for examining contemporary stereotypes and ideologies regarding language users and language use in Japanese (KinsuiSecondly, the comic medium has a well-recognized history of conveying information through the graphic manipulation of text (McCloud 1993).  Comics are distinct from most other writing which contains dialogue in that an author generally does not explicitly describe paralinguistic elements of an utterance.  That is, there is no clear place in a speech bubble for written descriptions of a character’s speech (e. g.  ‘he whispered in a thick French accent’).  Instead, authors tend to rely on the representation of words to express information about a character or speech act (McCloud 2006.  Wolk 2007).  This established reliance on graphic manipulation of text to create meaning provides the potential for comics/manga to be a particularly fertile location for observing the use of script as an index.  The manga used for analysis here, Usagi Doroppu, is a slice-of-life manga written and illustrated by the Japanese manga-ka Yumi Unita between 2005 and 2011.  The manga was first serialized in FEEL YOUNG, a manga magazine with an annual run of around 80,000 copies (Japanese Magazine Publishers Association 2014).  Generally, the comics within FEEL YOUNG fall within the Ladies’ Comics (redısu komikkusu) genre, which is aimed primarily at female readers between 15 and 45 years of age (Ito 2005).  However, although Usagi Doroppu contains tropes of this genre, being drawn in a realistic style and involving some discussion of relationships, it is atypical in not focusing on female protagonists or romance (Ueno 2006).  Rather, the protagonist of the first four volumes is a Japanese businessman named Daikichi who learns how to be a single father after adopting a six-year-old girl named Rin.  Each of these four initial volumes consists of about six months of time, with Rin in her first year of elementary school at the end of the fourth volume.  In the fifth volume the story enters its second major act, and jumps forward ten years.  Rin is now in high school, and Daikichi and Rin serve as co-protagonists.  As the story continues more romance-related elements appear, but the major plotline of the latter volumes centers around Rin deciding to find her biological mother.  The complete story is currently available in Japanese and English as nine individual volumes, and a tenth bonus volume (called a bangaihen) was released in 2011.  Usagi Doroppu was selected over other potential manga series due to.  (1) its popularity, having spawned an animated series and a feature film.  and (2) its creation by a single author/artist.  The manga’s mainstream nature raises confidence that the language/script use within is aimed at a fairly general readership.  Sole authorship ensures that there is no risk of script variation resulting from contrasting preferences.  While Japanese publishers can have internal guidelines for script use, the author confirmed in the interview that she had complete control over how she represented her characters’ dialogue (Yumi Unita, personal communication, 3 March 2015).  The data used in this study were collected by transcribing the entirety of the dialogue from Usagi Doroppu, and coding each utterance by volume, speaker, and page number using NVivo software (a data analysis program that allows the cataloging and coding of text and multimedia).  Every lexeme in the dialogue was then also coded in relation to the script it was written in (e. 