I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Children’s acquisition of a verb lexicon forms a crucial interface between lexical and grammatical development (Pinker, .  Tomasello, ).  Verbs emerge later than nouns and occupy a smaller percentage of the initial lexicon (Bates et al. , .  Nelson, ).  Theoretically, verb acquisition may be more difficult than noun acquisition.  First, verbs involve conceptually more complicated notions (cf.  Gleitman, Cassidy, Nappa, Papafragou & Trueswell, ).  Whereas early common nouns denote entities, verbs denote event structures.  The meaning of verbs must encode relationships between the event and one or more noun phrases, also known as arguments.  Second, information in the input may provide more support for the acquisition of nouns relative to verbs.  Nouns in the input tend to be aligned with the physical objects they refer to, but verbs in the input may not be ‘time locked’ to the events they describe (Gleitman et al. , ).  Finally, “verb acquisition entails the learning of sentence frames” (Hadley, , p.  ).  To learn a verb meaning is to learn what noun phrase arguments are involved and how to arrange the verb and the arguments in the correct sequence (Pinker, .  Rice, ).  In this sense, the expansion of the verb lexicon provides a foundation for the development of simple, diverse sentences (Hadley, ).  Despite the importance of the verb lexicon to children’s language development, few studies have investigated how input affects children’s verb acquisition, and different research traditions have approached this question from distinct perspectives.  One research tradition in developmental and educational psychology has focused on understanding relationships between language input and individual differences in children’s rate of vocabulary development.  These input studies have established the associations between lexical quantity and lexical diversity in parent input and children’s general vocabulary development (Hoff & Naigles, .  Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer & Lyons, .  Huttenlocher, Waterfall, Vasilyeva, Vevea & Hedges, .  Rowe, ).  By the third year of life, lexical diversity in parent input has been shown to be a stronger predictor of children’s later vocabulary abilities than the sheer quantity of words in parent input (Rowe, ).  However, it is not clear whether such relationships hold specifically for the verb lexicon.  An alternative approach, influenced by psycholinguistic theories of language acquisition, has focused on the problem of how children learn verb meanings.  Theories of SYNTACTIC BOOTSTRAPPING have proposed that children are sensitive to verb-related syntactic and morphological cues, as these cues may serve to restrict verb meanings (Behrend, Harris & Cartwright, .  Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz & Gleitman, .  Naigles & Swensen, .  Yuan, Fisher & Snedeker, ).  However, little is known about the nature of these structural cues in naturalistic parent input and how parents vary in providing verb-related structural cues to their children.  The current study integrated these two research traditions by investigating the contribution of lexical quantity, lexical diversity, and verb-related structural cues in parent input to children’s subsequent expressive verb diversity.  The methods used in early input studies were primarily observational, with studies documenting correlations between features of naturalistic parent speech at Time  and children’s progress in language development between Time  and Time  (see Richards, , and Valian, , for comprehensive reviews).  More recent studies have associated parent input quantity and diversity with children’s language development (Hoff & Naigles, .  Huttenlocher et al. , , .  Rowe, ).  For example, Hoff and Naigles () studied sixty-three children who ranged in age from .  to . .  Time  parent input measures, specifically the number of total words, the number of different words, and mean length of utterance (MLU) in morphemes, were positively associated with children’s Time  vocabulary size obtained  weeks later.  Huttenlocher et al. 