I N T R O D U C T I O N.  From an early age, children produce oral stories, and by the time children enter elementary school, they also start to compose written stories.  Although narrative writing has its roots in oral narration (Roth, ), it is generally acknowledged that speaking and writing are different modalities that each require a different style (Carvalho, ).  As such, children need to become aware of these modality differences and learn how to reflect them in the linguistic encoding of their narratives.  In both modalities, a coherent story typically consists of essential story elements including the main events, actions, and characters of the story – the referential aspects – as well as information on the thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and motivations that underlie these essential story elements – the evaluative aspects (Labov & Waletzsky, ).  The present study compares the development of evaluative aspects of spoken and written fictional narratives in middle to late elementary school, by analyzing the diversity and frequency of evaluative devices in the two modalities in a longitudinal sample.  Narratives are extended pieces of discourse that can be found in a variety of meaningful social contexts.  According to the Labovian framework (Labov, .  Labov & Waletzky, ), a narrative consists of a series of temporally ordered events whose importance is highlighted through evaluation.  More specifically, in Labov’s narrative model, the story’s main events, actions, and characters are structured in a prototypical narrative structure, comprising an initial orientation, a complication, and a resolution, which is intertwined with evaluative information, conveying a meaningful interpretation of the narrated events.  While the recapitulation of successive events is a basic requirement of a narrative, the evaluative aspects of the narrative stimulate real interest in the audience and increase the audience’s knowledge state and involvement in the story (van Beijsterveldt & van Hell, ).  The inclusion of evaluative aspects represents not only what the storyteller believes, but also what he perceives that the audience needs to be told in order to comprehend the narrative (Eaton, Collis & Lewis, ), thereby providing overall coherence to the narrative (Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, ).  Originally, Labov and Waletzky () stated that evaluation is a separate component, positioned between the complication and the resolution, which serves to emphasize the highpoint where the complication reaches its climax.  However, Labov () revised the original model and suggested that evaluative devices can be found distributed throughout the whole narrative.  Evaluative devices can be manifold.  They often involve explicit reference to the feelings, thoughts, and intentions of the story characters, but also more implicit devices that impart the narrator’s perspective are considered evaluative (e. g.  Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, .  Eaton et al. , .  Mason, .  Peterson & Biggs, .  Shiro, .  Ukrainetz, Justice, Kaderavek, Eisenberg, Gillam & Harm, .  van Beijsterveldt & van Hell, .  Zevenbergen, Whitehurst & Zevenbergen, ).  In spoken discourse, non-linguistic and paralinguistic devices, such as facial expression, gestures, and prosody, can also serve an evaluative function (Reilly, ).  Since Labov and Waletzky’s paper in , researchers have extensively studied the use of evaluation in narratives from a developmental perspective.  This is not surprising, given its potential to illuminate the development of both linguistic as well as socio-cognitive skills.  Evaluation relies on linguistic proficiency in both lexicon and syntax, but it also requires two fundamental abilities of social cognition.  the ability to adopt the perspective of the audience and adjust the story to the audience’s needs (van Dongen & Westby, ), and the ability to understand, talk about, and reflect upon characters’ actions, mental states, and beliefs, and to make inferences about them (Bamberg & Damrad-Frye, .  Eaton et al. 