INTRODUCTION.  Over the past six decades, sociolinguistic research has correlated linguistic variation with many aspects of social behavior.  characteristics of the speakers, of interaction with the listeners, and with the speech situation more generally.  This systematic social variability of form is generally said to have social meaning, hence to be available for social expression.  The ﬁrst quantitative study of a sound change (Labov 1963) showed that locally-constructed social meaning, furthermore, can serve as motivation for sound change.  With the accumulation of survey, ethnographic, and case-study evidence, and with the increasing diversity and sophistication of experimental and statistical methods, the study of sociolinguistic variation is engaging ever more deeply with social meaning.  Our aim in this paper is to explore and clarify the notion of social meaning in variation, its role in phonological change, and its locus in the phonological system.  We argue that social meaning accrues to concrete sounds – to phonetic elements – and not to the phonological structures in which those sounds participate.  For the purposes of this discussion, we define meaning as the conventional association of distinctions in the world with distinctions in linguistic form.  In other words, variables are signs.  Peirce (1931–1935) distinguishes three kinds of signs on the basis of the relation between form and content.  symbols by pure convention, icons by resemblance, and indexes by association in fact.  The indexical realm is based in contiguity within the speech situation, as form ‘points to’ the immediate context from the speaker’s perspective.  While this pointing may serve a referential function, as in the case of spatial and temporal deictics, sociolinguistic variables have no referential function. 1 In the case of morpho-syntactic variables (e. g.  negative concord), the presence of negation is referential, but variation in the number of negative particles is used as an intensifier.  that is, the degree of investment the speaker is making for this proposition (Labov 1984b).  In this case, variation imbues a referential sign with additional, indexical, meaning.  In the case of some lexico-pragmatic variables, such as the use of totally with non-gradable predicates, the semantics of the sign may actually contribute to its indexical potential (Acton and Potts 2014.  Beltrama 2016).  In this paper, we deal exclusively with phonological variation, whose indexicality is entirely independent of reference.  The double articulation of language (Hockett 1960.  Martinet 1968), in which phonology provides meaningless elements to combine to yield meaningful elements, leaves phonological units free to register distinctions in the collective co-existence that is the social world.  We commonly refer to the meaning of variation as ‘social meaning. ’ But in an important sense, all meaning is social inasmuch as it is constructed for the purposes of, and in the course of, social exchange.  The distinction between child and adult is based on conventional notions of what makes someone a child or an adult – notions based in shared understandings of age and development. 2 Even the distinction between a table and a bench is social inasmuch as it is based in conventional understandings of the differential characteristics and uses of these objects.  These conventions will change over time as our needs, activities etc.  affect the distinctions we live by.  While all symbols are social in this sense that they are socially constructed, the meaning of variation is purely social.  It has no reference – it does nothing but index something about the speaker as a social actor in the speech situation.  It is this indexical association that we refer to when we speak of social meaning.  There can be variation without social meaning – a difference in form becomes a sign through a process of enregisterment, as it becomes conventionally associated with some social distinction.  The term ‘enregisterment,’ as introduced by Agha (2003) in the context of the emergence of RP, is most commonly associated with a higher level sign – a register (e. g.  Johnstone, Andrus and Danielson 2006).  Variables become enregistered in the give and take of discourse, as hearers construe a relation between form and some aspect of the speaker in the situation, such as stance (Kiesling 2005) or qualities (Eckert 2016).  Macro-social correlations (i. e.  class, age, gender, ethnicity, geography) are not in themselves indications of social meaning, inasmuch as it is possible for such correlations to be well below the level of social awareness (see, e. g. , Tamminga 2016).  But they do indicate a probability that such meaning is at work at the local level.  For example, gender correlations on a macro-social scale point to the culturally central male-female distinction, which in turn abstracts over a range of globally constrained but locally constructed practices and potentials.  Thus, correlation of a variable with a gender category is likely to index that category only indirectly (Ochs 1991), in virtue of some immediately salient quality that is commonly associated with that gender category, such as refinement, toughness, emotionality or trendiness.  It is at the level of salient qualities that variation is put to use and takes on meaning, and one could even say that the use of a variable to index a quality plays a role in making that quality salient.  The meaning of a variable emerges not simply in the speaker’s production, but in the hearer’s interpretation in the moment.  Working with the highly enregistered and robustly studied (ING) variable, Kathryn Campbell-Kibler has shown that hearers do not interpret the coronal and dorsal variants of (ING) in the same way on every hearing.  Rather, their interpretation in the moment is a function of their mood and of their social perception of the speaker (CampbellKibler 2008).  It is in this process of interpretation that variation takes on meaning, and that this meaning can change.  Like reference, the indexicality of a variable emerges in use and can change over time, along with changes in the social distinctions it picks out.  The potential for continual change in meaning is specifically related to variation in Silverstein’s (2003) notion of orders of indexicality, through which a variable can progress from indexing a social position (e. g.  with a region, a class position, an ethnic group) to indexing some quality apparently associated with the people occupying that social position.  Indexical order primarily concerns change in social meaning.  It is related to levels of awareness, but in a different way from the indicator, marker, stereotype taxonomy which is based on the behavior of speakers in the interview context (Labov 1971).  Both approaches register theoretical points in a continuum of awareness through which variables may progress as they become increasingly enregistered (Agha 2003).  We become aware of indexical orders as variables achieve marker status, but how much awareness is required for a speaker to exercise agency in this process remains an empirical question.  This report will begin by reviewing the evidence for the social meaning of phonological variation, before considering the extent of its intersection with linguistic structure and its role as a driving force in changes within that structure.  It will appear that socially meaningful variation is not equally distributed over all phases of language structure, and that the more abstract categories and processes may not be socially evaluated by users of the language.  We will explore the most characteristic and vigorous domains ofage, gender, ethnicity, geography) are not in themselves indications of social meaning, inasmuch as it is possible for such correlations to be well below the level of social awareness (see, e. g. , Tamminga 2016).  But they do indicate a probability that such meaning is at work at the local level.  For example, gender correlations on a macro-social scale point to the culturally central male-female distinction, which in turn abstracts over a range of globally constrained but locally constructed practices and potentials.  Thus, correlation of a variable with a gender category is likely to index that category only indirectly (Ochs 1991), in virtue of some immediately salient quality that is commonly associated with that gender category, such as refinement, toughness, emotionality or trendiness.  It is at the level of salient qualities that variation is put to use and takes on meaning, and one could even say that the use of a variable to index a quality plays a role in making that quality salient.  The meaning of a variable emerges not simply in the speaker’s production, but in the hearer’s interpretation in the moment.  Working with the highly enregistered and robustly studied (ING) variable, Kathryn Campbell-Kibler has shown that hearers do not interpret the coronal and dorsal variants of (ING) in the same way on every hearing.  Rather, their interpretation in the moment is a function of their mood and of their social perception of the speaker (CampbellKibler 2008).  It is in this process of interpretation that variation takes on meaning, and that this meaning can change.  Like reference, the indexicality of a variable emerges in use and can change over time, along with changes in the social distinctions it picks out.  The potential for continual change in meaning is specifically related to variation in Silverstein’s (2003) notion of orders of indexicality, through which a variable can progress from indexing a social position (e. g.  with a region, a class position, an ethnic group) to indexing some quality apparently associated with the people occupying that social position.  Indexical order primarily concerns change in social meaning.  It is related to levels of awareness, but in a different way from the indicator, marker, stereotype taxonomy which is based on the behavior of speakers in the interview context (Labov 1971).  Both approaches register theoretical points in a continuum of awareness through which variables may progress as they become increasingly enregistered (Agha 2003).  We become aware of indexical orders as variables achieve marker status, but how much awareness is required for a speaker to exercise agency in this process remains an empirical question.  This report will begin by reviewing the evidence for the social meaning of phonological variation, before considering the extent of its intersection with linguistic structure and its role as a driving force in changes within that structure.  It will appear that socially meaningful variation is not equally distributed over all phases of language structure, and that the more abstract categories and processes may not be socially evaluated by users of the language.  We will explore the most characteristic and vigorous domains of social evaluation, yet show how the impact of social meaning can reach beyond its normal limits in the most favorable situations.  <Middle> FIELDS OF EVIDENCE FOR SOCIAL MEANING.  Since meaning is constructed in the interaction between speaker and hearer, evidence of social meaning ultimately must be sought by bringing together data on production and perception.  Over the years, work on perception from the earliest matched guise tests (Lambert et al.  1960) has shown that hearers use phonetic cues to place speakers in the social order, and that those perceived placements evoke a range of social evaluations.  When these placements correspond to production facts (e. g.  Labov 2006 [1966]), there is potential for social meaning.  But if the evaluations associated with those placements are evidence of social meaning, they must be reflected in speakers’ situated use of the variation.  Because the meanings of variables are not fixed but constitute something like an indexical field (Eckert 2008a), the study of perception must find a way to get at situated meaning.  More recent work on perception (e. g.  Campbell-Kibler 2008.  Podesva et al.  2015) has shown that hearers perceive meanings as a function of their perceptions of the context of utterance.  This work is extremely promising, but in its early stages.  In what follows, we will focus on evidence of social meaning in production only.  We take as evidence of social meaning a patterning of variation along some aspect of differentiation in the local social context.  Thus, we find social meaning where variables shift significantly across local social settings and situations, across different communities of practice, and in the speech of individuals who stand out as exceptional or prototypical.  The same individual in varying social settings.  The original studies of the speech community focused on random samples of single speakers, each in a similar social setting – the sociolinguistic interview.  In the interview, the degree of formality is deliberately varied, in order to vary the amount of attention the interviewee pays to his or her speech (Labov 1984a).  The resulting shift of stylistically sensitive variables gives an indirect indication of how they may operate in community interaction.  In actual practice, formality will be only one of a variety of factors giving rise to variability, as will attention to speech.  A direct view of how speakers change their variable resources from one social context to another has been obtained in several studies in which unobtrusive recordings were made of a given individual in changing social settings.  Coupland (1980) recorded the speech of a travel agent in Cardiff over five days at work, talking with friends and work-associates, clients and tour operators, in person and over the telephone.  He examined the shifts of five phonological variables with the status of Cardiff markers across these social contexts, and found that while the topic of conversation was not important in style shifting, channel, friendship status and work relations were.  The speaker’s use of the Cardiff variants decreased from casual chat to informal work-related conversation to talk with clients, and finally to doing business on the telephone.  Coupland also noted that these variables did not all vary in the same way – that the more highly stigmatized stereotypes (h-dropping, intervocalic /t/ flapping, and word-final cluster reduction) appeared regularly in informal speech with her office mates, but quite rarely with clients or on the phone, while the remaining variables showed a more gradual variability across all situations.  In the early stages of the study of Linguistic Change and Variation (henceforward LCV) in Philadelphia (Labov 1980, 2001), Arvilla Payne recorded ‘Carol Meyers’ (CM), a 48-year-old Philadelphia woman whom she knew intimately, over a two-day period.  These recordings took place in three social contexts.  in the travel agency where Carol worked (Office. O).  at dinner with CM’s family (Home. H).  and at a weekly bridge session, featuring lively interaction among four close female friends (Game. G).  Hindle (1979) analyzed the shifts of CM’s vowel system across these three social contexts, using the LPC analyses then available to the LCV project.  The FAVE program (Rosenfelder et al.  2011) has allowed us to complete the analysis for 18,352 vowels. 3 Figure 1, publishing this reanalysis for the first time, shows the values of normalized F1 and F2 in the three social contexts for the back upgliding vowels of Philadelphia.  • (aw).  the raising of /aw/ (down, out) • (owC).  the fronting of /ow/ in non-final position (boat, road, lower) • (owF).  the fronting of /ow/ in final position (go, snow) • (Tuw).  the fronting of /uw/ after coronals (two, noon) • (Kuw).  the fronting of /uw/ after non-coronals (move, who) Table 1 shows the results of regression analysis of the effect of social setting on the fronting of these vowels with stress and duration taken into account.  This single speaker’s contextual shifting takes place against the background of a community pattern in apparent time, where all Vw vowels are fronting and /aw/ is raising (Labov 2001.  Ch.  5).  For each vowel, the Game context is at the forefront of the change in progress and the Home context is the most conservative.  We also find that for these Philadelphia shifts, as for most sound changes, women are in the lead (Labov 1990, 2001).  Thus, Hindle (1979.  142) notes that CM’s pronunciation of these vowels in the Game context contributes to a particular female and perhaps youthful persona that she assumes in intimate and lively interaction with peers.  Before proceeding, it can be noted that an alternative interpretation of these data looks to the character of CM’s behavior in terms of the phonetic gestures involved.  In four vowels of Figure 1, the Game setting is shifted further front.  Gordon and Heath (1998) have argued that the frequency code (Ohala 1994), by which high and low acoustic frequency are associated with small and large size respectively, leads female speakers to lead in vowel fronting.  If this is so, one would expect it to hold regardless of the direction of the change.  Thus, we might have expected CM to front (aw) in the Game setting, but she instead emphasizes the raising component of the change.  We note also that the centralization of (ay) is male-dominated in one community (Philadelphia, Labov 1990) and female-dominated in another (Detroit, Eckert 2000).  This is not to say that the frequency code plays no role in variation (see below), but it is unlikely to explain gender on its own.  If the frequency code is at work in the construction of gender, it is based on an embodied experience of relative smallness – or of desired smallness.  And while smallness plays a role in hegemonic ideologies of femininity, it does not figure in all feminine expression (e. g.  Mendoza-Denton 1996, 2008).  Thus, one can expect the frequency code to actually differentiate among women.  A parallel investigation of the effect of social setting on speech style is reported in Podesva (2011), comparing the speech of Regan, a young Asian American gay man, in three settings that vary along dimensions similar to the CM study.  a meeting with his supervisor at work.  dinner with a close friend.  and ‘Boys’ Night Out,’ a weekly gathering of friends for dinner, drinks, and dancing.  Podesva emphasizes that Regan’s linguistic style in the Night Out situation is part of a ‘partier’ persona, quite possibly analogous to CM’s card game persona.  Podesva analyzed Regan’s vowels in these three settings in relation to the California Vowel Shift (CVS), one of the objects of study by the Voices of California group. 4 • incrementation of the nasal system, increasing the distance between short-a before nasals (BAN) and elsewhere (BAT) (Eckert 2008b).  • a chain shift involving the low back merger of BOT and BOUGHT, backing of /æ/ (BAT) and lowering and backing of /e/ (BET) (D’Onofrio 2015.  D’Onofrio et al.  in press).  • the parallel fronting of /ow/ after coronals (TOE) and non-coronals (BOAT) and of /uw/ after coronals (TOO) and non-coronals (BOOT) (Eckert 2011b.  Podesva et al.  2015).  Figure 2 shows mean values of F1 and F2 for eight vowels in the three social settings.  Three of the CVS shifts are more advanced in the Night Out setting.  It is evident that BAN is much more different from BAT in the Night Out than in the other settings, and the shifts of BOAT and BOOT and are most fronted in that setting5 (thus closing the gap between vowels with non-coronal onsets and the TOO, TOE vowels with coronal onsets).  At this point we must note the aspect of Figure 2 that is parallel to the gestural interpretation of Figure 1, more general than the configuration of specific vowels.  For all eight of Regan’s vowels, F1 is clearly highest for the Night Out setting, indicating greater sonority.  For the high and mid vowels, F1 values for the Friend setting are intermediate between Night Out and Supervisor.  Podesva also observes Regan’s use of falsetto intonation.  frequent in Night Out, intermediate in Friend and rare in Supervisor.  Thus, we observe global shifts of articulation in the construction of a social persona, while reflections of linguistic change in progress are embedded in these shifts in the relative positions of particular vowels.  Situations can also differ in affective key.  The merged low back vowel in California is in the process of backing and raising as part of the California Shift (D’Onofrio et al.  in press), commonly replaced by /æ/ as the lowest vowel in the system.  Backed variants of this vowel emerge frequently in negative expressive uses of particular lexical items and perhaps particularly exclamatives (e. g.  gosh, oh my God).  But it emerges as well in longer affective stretches.  Eckert (2011a) compared the realization of this vowel in the speech of a preadolescent girl, ‘Colette,’ in two conversations with different affective keys.  one in which Colette presented herself as a happy-go-lucky girl, talking about the things she liked to do, and one in which she complained at some length about what jerks boys are.  Her merged /o~oh/ vowel was significantly higher and further back (F1 p<. 001.  F2 p<. 025) in the negative conversation than in the positive one, as was the nucleus of (ay) (F1 p<. 025.  F2 p<. 001).  Affect in and of itself is eminently social, but in addition, it is clear that Colette considers her negative affect in this conversation to be indicative of her emerging status as a teenager – as having boys to complain about.  The affective use of vowel fronting and backing conforms to the frequency code mentioned above, and corresponds closely to Silverstein’s (1994) finding in Wasco Wishram of an association between positive and negative judgment and vowel fronting and backing.  This raises broader issues of phonetic processes and even embodiment, which we return to below.  The studies discussed above each focus on a single individual, but they bear crucially upon the social patterns that emerge in the larger community studies.  As mentioned in the introduction, the demographic patterns found in large survey studies abstract over a variety of adaptations of semiotic resources to specific situations.  The individual’s use of variation animates distinctions found in the patterns of increasingly broader communities.  Intermediate between individuals such as those discussed above and the macro-social structure are local social networks and communities of practice.  Social networks and communities of practice.  Linguistic change flows through networks of contacts between and among individuals.  These contacts cluster, and they cluster differently depending on the nature of the tie on which the network is based.  Each individual’s social network will include a variety of clusters – a friendship group, a neighborhood, an office, a garage band.  These clusters arise in response to the conditions of life encountered jointly in institutions, regions, social classes, etc. , and constitute communities of practice (Lave and Wenger 1991.  Eckert and McConnell-Ginet 1992).  The network outlines individual contacts, which underlie the mechanics of spread.  But while the mechanism of some innovations may be mechanical, most innovations are adopted in the service of the joint meaning-making enterprise that constitutes practice, and that is central to the construction of communities of practice.  The situational shifting discussed in the previous section in some cases commonly involves individuals’ movement among multiple communities of practice.  In this section, we will take up the community of practice as a locus of social meaning.  In an ethnographic study in the all-white high schools of the Detroit suburbs, Eckert (2000) found a hegemonic opposition between two class-based communities of practice – the Jocks, a middle-class, institution-based suburban culture.  and the Burnouts, a working-class, neighborhood-based and urbanoriented one.  While the Jocks avoid the urban area, the Burnouts frequent the parks and strip malls of the urban periphery, and seek out contact with their more urban peers, whose toughness and street smarts they admire.  Comparisons of schools across the suburban area (Eckert 2000) show that three sound changes – the backing of (ʌ) and (e) and the backing and raising of the nucleus of (ay) – are spreading outwards from the urban periphery, giving them the potential to index urban status and the qualities that go with that status. 6 As shown in Figure 3, the Burnouts’ urban orientation shows up in their lead in the use of all three of these changes.  While the correlation of the urban variants with these two communities of practice is evidence of their indexical value, further evidence emerges when we look to the more general school population, including those who affiliate with neither the Jocks nor the Burnouts, and who commonly refer to themselves as ‘In-Betweens. ’ People across the school population who engage in the practice of urban cruising (driving repeatedly along designated urban strips) use the urban variants significantly more than those who do not (Figure 4).  In their ethnographic work on Ocracoke Island, Wolfram and Schilling Estes (1995) identified a community of practice in the ‘Poker Players,’ a group of men who engaged in a regular poker game several times a week.  They also socialized in other contexts, worked in marine-related jobs, and shared strong ideologies about maintaining the traditional island life in the face of tourism and migration from the mainland.  These men stood out significantly from their peers in their retention of the conservative mid back [ɔy] pronunciation of (ay), as stereotyped in the designation of islanders as hoi toiders (high tiders).  This case is strikingly similar to Labov’s (1963) findings on Martha’s Vineyard, where the use of the conservative central nucleus of (ay) and (aw) indexed an emerging local ideological alignment against the threat of mainland economic incursion.  There, also, it was those engaged in the traditional local fishing economy who were most opposed to this incursion and who led in the reversal of the lowering.  Thus, the original centralized form, a first order index of island-born status, was recruited to create a new (‘second order’) index of island-based ideology.  Prototypical and exceptional individuals.  If variables had no social meaning, we would expect speakers to conform linguistically to those around them, with differences between individuals predictable purely on the basis of density of contact.  We find, though, that some speakers stand out from their linguistic surroundings as exceptional in a way that indicates a meaningful use of variables.  Nathan B.  A striking linguistic standout is Nathan B. , discussed in Labov (2006 [1966].  157–161).  An upper-middle-class and highly educated man from New York’s Lower East Side, Nathan B.  stood out starkly from the other speakers in his socio-economic stratum, with a use of stopped variants of (th) and (dh) that matched that of lower or working-class speakers.  Whatever the cause of the pattern, it had clear social meaning for those around him, for it was sufficient to bar him from an academic position.  He was told that continuing at the university would be contingent on improving his speech – something he was unwilling or unable to do.  Variation works in an analog fashion.  The augmentation of a variable can intensify its social meaning.  This intensification can be achieved through increased frequency of use, and through phonetic intensification as well.  In the case of sound change, it can be an exaggerated movement in the direction of variation – or away from it.  By intensifying her use of female-led sound changes in her bridge game with ‘the girls,’ Carol Meyers (Figure 1) achieved heightened expressivity appropriate to that particular context.  Some speakers are particularly prone to stylizing more generally, and consequently become outliers in the use of variables.  These speakers, whom we’ve referred to as ‘linguistic icons,’ (e. g.  Eckert 2000) have been pinpointed as leaders of linguistic change.  Celeste S.  The study of linguistic change and variation in Philadelphia focused on ten socially stratified neighborhoods.  Celeste S.  was a central figure in Clark Street, studied by Anne Bower, who was introduced to leading members of the neighborhood social networks at the weekly coffee hour at Celeste’s home.  Social network analysis showed Celeste to have the highest index of interaction within the neighborhood (Labov 2001.  Ch.  12).  She was also the most advanced in the raising and fronting of (eyC) in made, pain and (aw) in out, down.  Celeste was not only a prototypical exponent of Philadelphia phonology.  she exemplified the social ethos of the working-class community in her insistence on correcting violations of the social order.  This often led to violations of correct and polite behavior on her part, echoing another aspect of her linguistic pattern, a relatively high use of stops in the (dh) variable (but not as high as that of Nathan B. ).  Celeste’s life pattern supports the general conclusion of the Philadelphia study that the leaders of linguistic change were among the highest status persons in their local neighborhoods.  Her position as a social leader was doubtless enhanced by her moral strength and powerful stances. 