An important topic in psycholinguistic research is the nature of sentence representations during language comprehension.  Information from several sources is used to yield an interpretation of a sentence.  Syntactic processing is usually considered an essential step, as the comprehender has to build a syntactic structure according to the morphosyntactic rules of a language.  Traditional theories assume that language processing is based on complete and detailed representations of the input.  In addition to syntactic algorithms, sentence comprehension may be driven by nonsyntactic constraints and simple processing heuristics.  The good-enough approach to language comprehension assumes that the comprehender has access to two processing routes.  a complete syntactic route and a heuristic route that utilizes word order and plausibility heuristics to produce sufﬁciently good representations of sentences (F.  Ferreira, 2003.  Ferreira, Bailey, & Ferraro, 2002).  While the comprehender uses a combination of syntactic algorithms and heuristics, he or she could bypass a full syntactic analysis when faced with complex or temporarily ambiguous structures.  Under the good-enough account of processing, the comprehender may settle for an interpretation of a temporarily ambiguous sentence based on heuristics rather than on elaborate syntactic algorithms.  The good-enough representation of a sentence may be incomplete and incompatible with the actual input, as supported by the misinterpretation of garden-path and passive sentences.  The syntactic algorithm and the heuristic parser may generate different representations of temporarily ambiguous sentences such as (1).  (1) The student praised by the principal received good grades.  The example sentence is temporarily ambiguous between a past-tense main clause and a passive reduced relative clause structure.  In neutral contexts, the pasttense main clause structure is typically the preferred interpretation, resulting in increased processing difﬁculty if the sentence is disambiguated toward the passive reduced relative analysis at the by-phrase (Altmann, 1998.  Frazier & Clifton, 1998.  MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994.  McRae, Spivey-Knowlton, & Tanenhaus, 1998.  Trueswell, 1996.  Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994).  The main clause/reduced relative clause ambiguity has also been shown to pose parsing difﬁculties for second language (L2) readers when the initial interpretation must be revised upon disambiguation (Yang & Shih, 2013).  According to the goodenough approach, sentence comprehension could be based on heuristics, such as assignment of an agent role to the ﬁrst noun phrase and plausibility of the initial noun phrase as agent.  The comprehender may not construct an elaborate syntactic representation for the difﬁcult sentence, as heuristics offer a faster route.  Compared to ﬁrst language (L1) processing, L2 processing may be even more reliant on lexical or word-order heuristics while computing shallow good-enough syntactic representations (Clahsen & Felser, 2006.  Felser, Roberts, Gross, & Marinis, 2003).  To clarify whether the comprehender constructs an abstract syntactic representation for a temporarily ambiguous sentence, the study utilized structural priming as a means to probe syntactic representations during sentence comprehension.  Structural priming is the tendency to repeat a structural pattern that has been previously encountered (Bock, 1986).  The paper used the term structural priming rather than syntactic priming because part of structural priming might result from nonsyntactic sources (e. g. , Bock, Loebell, & Morey, 1992).  Prior exposure to a particular syntactic structure facilitates subsequent processing of the same or a related structure.  For example, if people encounter a sentence with passive voice, they are more likely than normal to use passives in subsequent sentences.  Structural priming taps into syntactic representation, as at least part of the priming effect depends on the repetition of syntactic structure across sentences and cannot be fully accounted for by the repetition of lexical items (e. g. , Bock, 1989.  Pickering & Branigan, 1998) or thematic role order (e. g. , Bock & Loebell, 1990.  Pickering, Branigan, & McLean, 2002.  Salamoura & Williams, 2007).  The occurrence of structural priming suggests that a syntactic representation is constructed and shared across primes and targets.  A few studies have used structural priming to investigate sentence comprehension and production in a bilingual context (Bernolet, Hartsuiker, & Pickering, 2007.  Chen, Jia, Wang, Dunlap, & Shin, 2013.  Desmet & Declercq, 2006.  Hartsuiker, Pickering, & Veltkamp, 2004.  Kidd, Tennant, & Nitschke, 2015.  Loebell & Bock, 2003.  Salamoura & Williams, 2006, 2007.  Schoonbaert, Hartsuiker, & Pickering, 2007.  Shin & Christianson, 2009.  Weber & Indefrey, 2009).  These studies address the question of how bilinguals represent syntax in their two languages.  By examining cross-linguistic structural priming, inferences can be drawn about whether bilinguals have two separate syntactic systems or one integrated system with some information shared between the languages.  Cross-linguistic priming provides evidence for shared syntactic representations in bilinguals.  There are, however, limited studies on cross-linguistic priming in sentence comprehension, and the priming effects are complicated by the inﬂuences of word-order and lexical repetition between primes and targets.  Most comprehension studies investigate structural priming using temporarily ambiguous sentences, with the hypothesis that processing of a dispreferred structure would be easier than normal when target sentences are preceded by syntactically related primes.  Presumably, priming could enhance the availability of a dispreferred structure and thus reduce comprehension difﬁculty at disambiguation.  Under a lexicalist account of parsing, a primed syntactic representation is accessed via the lexical item that appears in both prime and target sentences.  In contrast, a nonlexicalist approach suggests that syntactic information is not bound to speciﬁc words and that activation of a structure can be lexically independent.  Thus, structural priming can occur in the absence of lexical overlap across sentences.  The small body of comprehension research has produced inconclusive evidence regarding the effects of lexical repetition on structural priming.  In many cases, comprehension priming appears to be lexically dependent and subject to a lexical boost (Tooley & Traxler, 2010).  Nevertheless, a few studies did ﬁnd verb-independent structural priming in comprehension (e. g. , Pickering, McLean, & Branigan, 2013.  Thothathiri & Snedeker, 2008.  Traxler, 2008).  Furthermore, while robust structural priming has been observed across languages with structures of the same word order, it remains unclear whether structures of different word order can prime each other.  Cross-linguistic differences in word order have raised the important question of how bilinguals represent similar structures that have different word order in their two languages.  Two models have been proposed based on different assumptions concerning whether people construct syntactic representations in one stage or two stages during sentence processing.  A two-stage account (e. g. , Bock & Levelt, 1994.  Garrett, 1980.  Hartsuiker, Kolk, & Huiskamp, 1999.  Hartsuiker & Westenberg, 2000) distinguishes functional and positional level of syntactic construction.  Functional-level processing selects lexical items to express conceptual content and then assigns grammatical functions (e. g. , subject or object) to constituents carrying thematic roles (e. g. , agent or patient).  Positional-level processing then imposes word order on the constituent structure through a linearization process.  In other words, syntactic representation includes a functional level of unordered constituent structure and a separate positional level of linear ordering.  Under this account, bilinguals have shared representations of equivalent structures in their two languages, regardless of word order.  In contrast, a one-stage account of syntactic construction (e. g. , Pickering et al. , 2002) maintains that both hierarchical and linear relations between constituents are computed simultaneously at a single level.  The positional information of constituent structures is encoded along with the functional level of syntactic representation.  From this viewpoint, structures that differ in word order across languages are represented separately (De Bot, 1992.  Ullman, 2001).  Bilingual research has yielded inconsistent ﬁndings supporting either a one-stage (e. g. , Bernolet et al. , 2007.  Kidd et al. , 2015.  Loebell & Bock, 2003.  Pickering et al. , 2002) or a two-stage (e. g. , Chen et al. , 2013.  Desmet & Declercq, 2006.  Shin & Christianson, 2009.  Weber & Indefrey, 2009) account of syntactic construction.  In an attempt to explain the interaction between lexical and syntactic processes during bilingual processing, Hartsuiker et al.  (2004) proposed an integrated model of representation (i. e. , shared lexicon and shared syntax), which is an extension of Pickering and Branigan’s (1998) lexicalist model.  Before we review the theoretical accounts in detail, it is important to note that Hartsuiker et al. ’s model is based on a limited number of studies on structural priming in bilingual production.  Hartsuiker and Pickering (2008) emphasized the need for more empirical data to inform the bilingual representation model.  The present study adopted Hartsuiker et al. ’s integrated model of representation, as it is speciﬁcally concerned with the interface between lexical access and structural building in bilingual processing.  Hartsuiker et al.  (2004) proposed that the lexicon and syntax are shared between the two languages of a bilingual.  More speciﬁcally, bilinguals have a single integrated lemma stratum that contains language-speciﬁc lemma nodes.  Each lemma node, which represents the base form of a word (e. g. , hit in English and golpear in Spanish), is linked to a speciﬁc language node (e. g. , English or Spanish), as well as to a shared conceptual node (e. g. , HIT [X, Y]), category node (e. g. , verb), and combinatorial nodes (e. g. , active or passive structure).  The experience with a passive structure will activate the passive combinatorial node as well as the verb lemma used in the structure.  The passive combinatorial node will remain active and thus will facilitate subsequent processing of a passive structure.  Structural priming also occurs across languages because the activated combinatorial node is linked to both languages.  Bilinguals can be primed to use a passive structure even if it appears in a different language.  This suggests that an integrated syntactic representation (as speciﬁed in a combinatorial node) is accessed during the processing of the same structure in the two languages.  Furthermore, encountering identical or translation-equivalent verbs across sentences will boost structural priming because additional activation will arise from the link between a verb lemma and a combinatorial node.  Nevertheless, Hartsuiker et al. ’s model does not specify whether grammatical function and word-order information are differentiated for combinatorial nodes, as their model was proposed based on priming between Spanish and English passives with an identical word order.  As mentioned above, controversy exists as to whether grammatical encoding occurs in one stage (a single level of syntactic representations with word order as an integral part) or two stages (two separate levels of functional and positional representations).  In the following section, we discuss lexical and word-order effects on crosslinguistic structural priming during sentence comprehension, which could inform a model of bilingual representation.  Then, we describe the experiment and draw predictions about cross-linguistic structural priming based on Hartsuiker et al. ’s (2004) model.  Previous studies indicated that structural priming affected online comprehension of ambiguous sentences, such as those involving reduced relative/main clause, double object/prepositional object, or early/late closure ambiguity.  These studies also suggested that priming effects were enhanced with identical verbs in prime and target sentences.  Eye-tracking and self-paced reading data showed that total reading times on the disambiguating region (i. e. , the by-phrase) were reduced when targets and primes shared verbs but not when they contained synonymous or different verbs (Tooley, Traxler, & Swaab, 2009.  Traxler & Tooley, 2008.  Traxler, Tooley, & Pickering, 2014).  Likewise, Arai, van Gompel, and Scheepers (2007) and Carminati, van Gompel, Scheepers, and Arai (2008) claimed that structural priming in dative structure required verb repetition.  The eye-movement data revealed that after listening to a double-object prime, participants were anticipating a recipient immediately following the verb as in a double-object dative structure.  The priming effect was only present with verb overlap between prime and target.  Traxler (2015) found facilitated processing of an early closure sentence after reading an early closure prime with a repeated verb.  In addition, Melinger and Dobel (2005) demonstrated that a single verb presented in isolation was sufﬁcient to prime a particular syntactic frame.  Dutch and German native speakers were more likely to reuse the primed dative structure after being exposed to nonalternating ditransitive verbs that were restricted to either prepositional or double-object dative construction, for example, contribute only used in prepositional datives and ﬁne only in double-object datives.  The authors concluded that a verb’s argument structure is lexically encoded and can be used immediately to resolve syntactic ambiguity during sentence processing.  The ﬁndings of verb-speciﬁc structural priming effects have led to the proposal that sentence comprehension is guided by lexically dependent syntactic information, which can be accessed during word retrieval (Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999.  Pickering & Branigan, 1998. 