I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Cross-linguistic research is essential to theoretical development in language acquisition research, allowing us to determine universal as opposed to language-specific constraints on the acquisition process.  One structure that has received considerable attention in the grammatical acquisition literature is the relative clause (henceforth RC) (see Kidd, ).  In this paper we present three studies that investigated the acquisition of RCs in children acquiring Finnish, a language for which there is little data on RC acquisition.  Acquisition of relative clauses.  Most research on the acquisition of RCs has focused on age of acquisition and the level of difficulty children experience in naturalistic and experimental contexts with subject RCs such as (), object RCs such as (), and oblique RCs such as ().  () The dog that __ chased the cat.  () The cat that the dog chased ___.  () The dog to whom the boy gave the bone ___.  The general consensus amongst many scholars is that subject RCs are essentially easier to acquire than non-subject RCs, based on the following.  (a) subject RCs have been reported to emerge at an earlier developmental stage in naturalistic child language than non-subject RCs (e. g.  Brandt, Diessel & Tomasello, .  Diessel, .  Diessel & Tomasello, ).  (b) the majority of experimental evidence suggests that children perform best on subject RCs in comparison to other RC types (e. g.  Adani, .  de Villiers, Tager Flusberg, Hakuta & Cohen, .  Diessel & Tomasello, .  Friedmann, Belletti & Rizzi, .  Goodluck, .  Guasti, Stavrakaki & Arosio, .  Kas & Lukács, ), although more recently some scholars have noted that this effect appears to be modulated by distributional and typological features of individual languages (Arnon, .  Brandt, Kidd, Lieven & Tomasello, .  Diessel, .  Kidd, Brandt, Lieven & Tomasello ).  Even though there is general agreement on subject RC advantage over other RC types, there are several competing theoretical explanations for the effect, ranging from appeals to the primacy of subjects in syntactic derivation (either typologically.  Keenan & Comrie, .  or formally.  Rizzi, ), appeals to processing routines and memory capacity (O’Grady, ), and appeals to distributional frequency (Diessel, .  Kidd et al. , ).  These approaches often make very similar predictions and can be difficult to distinguish.  In the current paper we take a usage-based perspective, assuming that linguistic representations of structure are constructed on the basis of experience.  From this perspective we consider why, for Finnish, we do not observe a clear subject advantage in RC acquisition.  Subject–non-subject RC asymmetry.  The evidence for the subject–object asymmetry largely comes from a fairly narrow range of languages where RCs display distinct structural similarities (e. g.  English, German, and Hebrew).  In terms of RCs, these all are ‘head-first’ languages (i. e.  the RC comes after the (head)noun that it modifies).  Data from languages whose RCs do not display ‘head-first’ syntactic structure are less clear.  For instance, acquisition studies with children acquiring Basque (Carreiras, Duñabeitia, Vergara, de la Cruz-Pavía & Laka, .  Gutierrez-Mangado, ), Chinese (Chan, Matthews & Yip, .  Chen & Shirai, ), Japanese (Ozeki & Shirai, .  Suzuki, ), and Quechua (Courtney, ) either show no difference between subject and object RCs (the most common comparison), an object RC advantage, or mixed results depending on the methodology used.  Even though data from Basque, Chinese, Japanese, and Quechua suggest that there may be no universal subject RC dominance, comparing data from these languages directly with languages like English, German, and Hebrew can be problematic for two reasons.  First, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and Basque are ‘head-final’ languages (i. e.  the RC precedes the noun that it modifies).  This means that RCs in these languages are structurally distinctly different from languages like English, which might explain the cross-linguistic differences in developmental and processing patterns observed between these two language groups.  Second, the comparison might not be warranted because, at least for some head-final languages (e. g.  East Asian languages), typologists have questioned whether true RCs actually exist (Comrie, ).  Finnish RCs, like English, German, and Hebrew RCs, are head-first structures.  Due to the highly inflected nature of Finnish, its flexible word order, and the distributional frequencies of RCs, the acquisition of Finnish RCs is relevant to the question as to whether all head-first languages show subject dominance.  Linguistic properties of relative clauses in Finnish, and their acquisition Finnish is a head-ﬁrst, nominative–accusative language.  Prototypically, a RC directly follows its head noun.  Finnish has three relative pronouns.  JOKA and KUKA, which often refer to animate entities, and MIKÄ, which often, but not necessarily, refers to inanimate entities (Hakulinen, Vilkuna, Korhonen, Koivisto, Heinonen & Alho, ).  This is similar to English speakers having the option of using that, who, or which.  Unlike English, but similarly to German, Finnish relative pronouns are inﬂected for case and number.  Relative pronouns are obligatory, and their case usually indicates what role the relativized element plays within the RCs.  The nominative predominantly expresses the grammatical case of subject.  the accusative, partitive, and, in some instances the genitive and nominative, express the object.  genitive expresses the possessive.  and the rest of the ﬁfteen cases are locative or marginal (Hakulinen et al. , .  Laaksonen & Lieko, ).  Indirect objects are expressed in the same way as oblique cases (i. e.  by using a locative inﬂection on the noun).  Examples ()–() exemplify subject, object, and oblique RCs.  () Kissakoiraalöi Cat-NOM which-NOM hit-past-sg dog-PART[OBJ] ‘The cat which hit a dog’ () Koirakissa[OBJ] Dog-NOM which-PART cat-NOM hit-past-sg[SUBJ] ‘The dog which the cat hit’ () Sohvakoira[OBL] Sofa-NOM which-ABL dog-NOM fall-past-sg‘The sofa from/oﬀ which a dog fell’Acquisition of relative clauses in Finnish.  A small number of previous studies have touched upon Finnish RC acquisition (e. g.  Kauppinen, .  Lieko, .  Toivanen, ).  However, to our knowledge there is only one past study focusing exclusively on early RC acquisition in Finnish.  Kirjavainen and Lieven () reported on a naturalistic corpus analysis of one Finnish child, Piia, and her caregivers’ data between the child’s ages of approx.  .  and . .  Piia’s earliest RCs (N = ) were subject RCs, which preceded any other RC structure found in the child’s data by several months.  This is consistent with naturalistic data from other nominative–accusative languages (Brandt et al. , .  Diessel & Tomasello, ).  Piia’s use of RCs clauses changed when she approached her third birthday.  At this point in development, oblique RCs became her most frequent RC structure (%), with subject and object RCs produced less frequently (each used in around % of all RC types).  Compared to other languages this is a fairly striking result (e.  g.  Keenan & Comrie, ).  For instance, English- and German-speaking children produce oblique RCs proportionally much less frequently (English.  %.  Diessel and Tomasello, .  German.  %.  Brandt et al. , ).  At least two factors can explain the discrepancy between Finnish and English/German children’s use of oblique RCs.  First, oblique RCs are the conventional way in Finnish to express many meanings for which Englishand German-speakers are more likely to use subject or object RCs.  see examples () and ().  () Minäbreak-ps-past sinisiä raitojaoli be-ps-past blue stripe-plural-PART sen kupin the cup-ACC which-INECorresponding English oblique RC.  ‘I broke the cup on which there was blue stripes’ Corresponding English subject RC.  ‘I broke the cup that had blue stripes (on it). ’ () Se tyyppimeThat person-NOM who-ALL we-NOM go-pl-prestoday Corresponding English oblique RC.  ‘The person to whom we will go today. ’ Corresponding English object RC.  ‘The person who we will go and seeConsequently, oblique RCs are more frequent in Finnish children’s input (% of RC structures.  Kirjavainen & Lieven, ) than in English (%.  Diessel, ) or German (%.  Brandt et al. , ).  This appears to result in quicker acquisition of these structures.  These distributional features of RCs in naturalistic child and caregiver Finnish would suggest that, in Finnish, oblique RCs are not more diﬃcult than subject (or object) RCs.  Thus, testing Finnish children’s behaviour in experimental contexts with subject, object, and oblique RCs could shed light on the question as to whether oblique RCs are universally more diﬃcult than subject and object RCs (e. g.  Keenan & Comrie, ), or whether the previously observed asymmetry/hierarchy has been created by distributional properties of those structures in previously studied languages.  Second, it has been suggested that oblique RCs are more diﬃcult than subject and object RCs because in languages such as English and German oblique RCs usually consist of a relative pronoun and a preposition, which either occur adjacent to each other (e. g.  German.  Das ist der Mann, mit dem ich getanzt habe, and English.  That was the man with whom I danced) or are separated by at least two words (English.  That was the man who I danced with) (Diessel & Tomasello, ).  Because in Finnish both grammatical and locative case information can be expressed by a single case-marked relative pronoun, in terms of lexical complexity, subject, object, and single-word oblique relativizers can be seen as being equally easy/ diﬃcult.  However, two types of oblique relatives occur in Finnish.  one-word oblique (henceforth oblique) RCs (see example ()) and two-word oblique (henceforth oblique) RCs (see example ()).  This feature of Finnish allows us to test whether oblique RCs are inherently more diﬃcult than subject and object RCs, or whether the reported diﬃculty of oblique RCs is created by the complexity of the oblique relativizer. on se sänkymissänukkui that bed-NOM which-INE cat-NOM sleptillalla evening-ADE ‘That’s the bed in which/where a cat slept in the evening’ minkä sisään() Toi on se sukkathat sock-NOM which-GEN in-ILL mouse-NOMkiipesi‘That’s the sock in which a mouse climbed’.  <Middle> The current research.  In comparison to many other head-ﬁrst languages, Finnish children hear and use an overwhelmingly high number of non-subject RCs.  This usage pattern, as assumed by usage-based constructivist theoretical stances (e. g.  Tomasello, ), should have a strong inﬂuence on children’s acquisition, such that Finnish-speaking children should be less likely to show a subject-advantage in comparison to children acquiring languages such as English, German, and Hebrew.  We tested these predictions across three studies.  Study  reanalysed Kirjavainen and Lieven’s () naturalistic data, focusing on one major variable that has been shown to aﬀect the distribution of subject and object RCs.  the animacy of the head noun.  Animate nouns make good agents, whereas inanimate nouns are typically patients (Fox & Thompson, ).  Accordingly, many studies have shown that subject RCs are more likely to have animate heads than non-subject RCs, which typically have inanimate heads (e. g.  Diessel, .  Kidd et al. , ).  We thus asked whether this is also the case in Finnish.  In Studies  and  we then investigated whether these distributional diﬀerences across diﬀerent RC types signiﬁcantly inﬂuence Finnish-speaking children’s comprehension and production of RCs.  STUDY .  CORPUS ANALYSIS. Piia is a monolingual first-born child in an upper-working-/middle-class family, in Kotka, southeast Finland.  The language used in her corpus is colloquial speech typical to the geographical area.  Piia was audio-recorded by her parents for approximately three hours per week between the ages of . · and . · (approx.   recordings, approx.   hours of data in total.  Kirjavainen-Max Planck corpus).  The interaction during the recordings was completely spontaneous, most commonly involving an interaction between the child and one or both of her parents (or other relatives) during meal times or play sessions.  After the age of .  her younger sister was often present during the recordings, although she rarely took part in the interaction.  The data was transcribed using the CHAT software (MacWhinney, ).  In the current study we include data recorded between . · and . · (N=  recordings, approx.  , word tokens, approx.  , child utterances, approx.  , adult utterances).  Searches Morphological coding has yet to be carried out on the Piia-corpus.  We therefore searched on the flo-transcription line of Piia’s and her interlocutors’ speech for each possible forms of different relative pronouns.  The flo-line semantically mirrors the main transcription line, but represents colloquial (i. e.  often shortened yet morphologically marked) word forms in standard language (see example ()).  Our search was therefore likely to extract standard as well as colloquial relativizer forms from the data, and because the relative pronoun is an obligatory part of Finnish RC constructions, our search is likely to have extracted all RCs in the data.  () Main-line.  Miä juoksin siihe taloo mis oli punanen katto Flo-line.  Minä juoksin siihen taloon missä oli punainen katto.  ‘I ran to the house which had a red roof’ The KWAL program of the CLAN software (MacWhinney ) was used to extract sentences with relative pronouns (MIKÄ, JOKA, KUKA) in fourteen cases (nominative, accusative, partitive, genitive, translative, inessive, elative, illative, adessive, ablative, allative, sublative, temporal, and causative) in the singular and plural.  Cases that are unlikely to occur in relative clauses (e. g.  abessive) and/or that are unlikely to be found in colloquial spoken (child) language (e. g.  essive) were excluded from the search.  Because some relative pronoun forms are identical to interrogative pronouns (e. g.  mikä), the output was manually searched for target structures.  Both restrictive and non-restrictive RCs were included in our analysis, and no distinction was made between the two.  The child’s repetitions and imitations of adults’ language as well as songs and rhymes were excluded. The search output was coded for the following.  i.  the syntactic function of the NP within the RC (SUBJ, OBJ, OBL).  For the purpose of this analysis, we did not distinguish between oblique and oblique RCs because (a) Piia did not produce any oblique RCs in the data sampled and (b) only a handful of oblique RCs (% of oblique RCs) were found in the adults’ data.  ii.  animacy of the head noun (animate, inanimate).  This was done separately for the child and her interlocutors.  In Finnish, case marking on the relative pronoun often indicates the role that the relativized element plays within the RC.  Because of some overlap, for instance, between subject and object pronouns, (a) the pronoun form, (b) the argument structure, and (c) semantics of the sentence were used to determine the syntactic role of the relativized NP.  Toys that can be perceived as animate were coded as such.  If it was impossible to determine the syntactic function or the animacy of the head, the sentence was coded as ambiguous.  The coding is illustrated in Table .  To determine reliability for the coding of the relativized element (subject, object, oblique, ambiguous), % (N= ) of the input and % (N= ) of the child’s targets were recoded by a second coder.  The agreement was high.  Child ·% (к = ·), Input %.  Disagreement in the coding for the child’s targets was adjudicated by the first author. We found  RC structures (SUBJ.  %, OBJ.  %, OBL.  %) in Piia’s speech and  (SUBJ.  %, OBJ.  %, OBL.  %) in her input.  The small number of RCs found in Piia’s data are likely due to the relatively early developmental period sampled (. –. ).  Piia’s data is nevertheless included here to illustrate that the animacy of the head NP in diﬀerent RC structures in her language corresponds to the pattern displayed by the Finnish adults.  In four (<%) of the input sentences the syntactic function of the relativized element was ambiguous and so they were excluded from the analysis.  Figures  (input) and  (output) illustrate the proportions of animate and inanimate head referents found for each RC type.  The input and child data looked very similar.  First, there were more non-subject RCs than subject RCs overall, but this was moderated by the included here to illustrate that the animacy of the head NP in different RC structures in her language corresponds to the pattern displayed by the Finnish adults.  In four (<%) of the input sentences the syntactic function of the relativized element was ambiguous and so they were excluded from the analysis.  Figures  (input) and  (output) illustrate the proportions of animate and inanimate head referents found for each RC type.  The input and child data looked very similar.  First, there were more non-subject RCs than subject RCs overall, but this was moderated by the animacy of the head noun.  In Piia’s input the distribution of animate and inanimate head nouns significantly differed across structure types (Chi-square result.  χ = ·, df=, p < ·, ϕ = ·).  This significant difference was driven by the more even distribution of animate and inanimate heads in subject RCs.  although when analyzed separately all structures contained significantly more inanimate than animate heads (binomial tests.  subject RCs.  p = ·, object RCs.  p < ·.  oblique RCs.  p < ·), the subject RC result is not significant following Bonferroni adjustment (α = ·/ = ·).  Indeed, removing subject RCs from the overall Chi-square analysis results in a non-significant result and little variance explained (χ = ·, df=, p = ·, ϕ = ·), suggesting that the subject RCs were driving the initial significant result.  Piia did not produce enough tokens of each structure type to have a good degree of confidence in any statistical analyses, and thus we merely interpret her data qualitatively.  DISCUSSION.  The corpus analysis shows similar results to previous RC studies in which an effect of animacy and RC type has been found (e. g.  Diessel, .  Fox and Thompson, .  Kidd et al. , , Mak, Vonk & Schriefers, , ).  Our Finnish-speaking child and adults rarely produce object or oblique relatives with animate heads.  Consistent with Diessel (), subject relatives, although commonly produced with inanimate head referents, were more likely to have animate heads than the other two RC types.  The close correspondence between Piia’s input and her own speech suggests that children’s language experience heavily shapes language use.  STUDY .  RELATIVE CLAUSE COMPREHENSION.  The findings from Study  suggest that, (i) as in more well-studied languages, RC formation is significantly affected by the animacy of the head referent, and (ii) Finnish-speaking children hear and use considerably more non-subject than subject RCs, a result that seems almost entirely due to the greater use of oblique RCs.  In Study  we investigated whether these usage facts about Finnish affect children’s comprehension of subject, object, and oblique/oblique RCs.  In addition, by including oblique and oblique RC test items, we were able to test some potential reasons for previously reported difficulty associated with oblique RCs.  Based on the assumption that animate entities make better subjects and that inanimate entities function better as objects, the usage-based prediction is that (a) children should perform better with subject than object RCs when the test sentences contain an animate head and (b) inanimate head nouns should improve performance on non-subject RCs.  Furthermore, the usage-based stance assumes that distributional properties of linguistic items play an important role in affecting children’s language acquisition and processing.  Thus, the usage-based stance predicts that the large preponderance of non-subject RCs in Finnish children’s input should affect Finnish children’s representation of RCs.  Specifically, the preponderance of non-subject RCs reduces the strong expectation that a relativized NP takes a subject role, such that the difference between subject and non-subject RCs observed in many other languages should be attenuated or even non-significant in Finnish.  That is, no overall subject advantage is predicted for Finnish.  Three- to four-year-old children were tested on a referent selection task that measured their comprehension of subject, object, oblique, and oblique RCs that contained either animate or inanimate head nouns. Participants.  Forty children aged . –.  were recruited from nurseries in Kotka, southeast Finland and participated in our two studies (Study  and Study ).  Thirty-eight of these children took part in Study .  However, the fourteen oldest children (. –. ) were excluded from the analysis due to them being at ceiling.  Thus, data from twenty-four children ( female) aged . –.  (mean . , SD=·) were included in the current study.  Apart from one child, who was tested in the home environment, the children were tested in a quiet area of their nursery.  All participants were typically developing monolingual Finnish-speakers.  Materials.  Thirty-two test items were created.  Each of these items consisted of background sentences, one distractor sentence, and one test sentence.  The test sentences were manipulated for the RC type (subject, object, oblique, oblique) and animacy of the head NP (animate, inanimate).  The test sentences were nine or, in the case of the two-word relativizer sentences (oblique), ten words long.  Each background and test sentence had two NPs.  Apart from a handful of test verbs (pomppia ‘bounce’, pomputtaa ‘make something bounce’, piiloutua ‘hide’, luikerrella ‘slither’, ryömiä ‘crawl’), all head NPs and verbs were found in the Finnish CDI (– months) (Lyytinen, ), indicating that the verbs used should be familiar to our children aged . –. .  To specifically address the subject– object asymmetry found in previous studies, half of our materials had animate heads, and were reversible (i. e.  both nouns within the RC could have plausibly been the subject or object of the sentence).  In addition, specifically to test animacy effects (Fox & Thompson, ), half of our test sentences had inanimate heads.  Finnish has an intricate case-marking system and consequently it was impossible to choose only one relativizer for our test sentences.  We therefore searched for the frequencies of different relativizers in the child’s output in the Kirjavainen-Max Planck corpus.  Because the frequency of different relativizers in RC and non-RC constructions (e. g.  interrogatives) varies, we were unable to tightly control for the frequency of the relativizers used between different types of target sentences.  However, several instances of our subject, object, and oblique relativizers were found in the Kirjavainen-Max Planck corpus, which we took to indicate that our experimental children were familiar with each of these relativizers.  The relative pronouns in the subject RCs were in the nominative case, and in the object RCs in the partitive case.  The relativizers used in the animate oblique RCs were kenelle(ALL) ‘for whom’ (oblique) and kenen (GEN) kanssa ‘with whom’ (oblique) and inanimate oblique RCs missä (INE) ‘in(side) which’ (oblique) and minkä(GEN) sisään(ILL) ‘in(to) which’ (oblique).  Table A in the ‘Appendix’ lists the relativizers used and their distributional frequencies.  Procedure.  The children were tested in two sessions.  In each session, they completed half of Study  materials (comprehension) and half of Study  materials (repetition).  Half of the children were tested on Study  materials first, half on Study  materials.  The order between sessions was counterbalanced so that for half of the children one set of items occurred in the first session, half in the second.  For most of the children the two sessions were administered during one day so that the first session took place in the morning and the second in the afternoon.  For six children the sessions took place on two consecutive days.  The task in Study  was similar to the one used by Brandt et al.  ().  Presented as the ‘slide-game’, children were shown a small slide, and the experimenter explained that she had a lot of toys that wanted to go down the slide, but that the toys must go down one at a time.  The experimenter said that she would tell the child whose turn it was to have a go, after which the child could slide the toy down.  For every target sentence, the child was shown three toys (e. g.  two tigers and an elephant).  The experimenter labelled the toys (e. g.  “Look, I have two tigers and an elephant here”).  The pair of animals (e. g.  tigers) were always distinguishable by a prominent attribute (e. g.  colour, size).  Each of the toys then performed a different action (e. g.  one tiger chased an elephant, the other tiger stroked the elephant) and was placed in front of the child.  The location of the two tokens of head referent with reference to the child (i. e.  left or right) was counterbalanced.  Half of the correct referents for each target sentence type were placed on the right, and half on the left of the child.  After the head NP toys (e. g.  tigers) had been placed in front of the child, a distractor scene was acted out.  For this, the additional (non-target) NP (e. g.  elephant) performed an intransitive action and the experimenter explained what the toy was doing (e. g.  “Look, now the elephant stomps in the jungle!”).  The distractor NP was then placed between the target toys in front of the child, i. e.  there were three toys (or combinations of the three toys) to choose from when the children were making their referential choices.  The child was asked to give the experimenter one of the items by sliding it down the slide (e. g.  “Give me the tiger that chased the elephant”).  Table B in the supplementary on-line content lists the background and target sentences (see http. //dx. doi. org/.  /S. The experimenter coded for the children’s choices on-line as either (a) Correct (e. g.  the correct tiger), (b) Head token errors (e. g.  the incorrect tiger), (c) NP other errors (e. g.  the elephant), (d) Other (i. e.  the correct tiger with the elephant, the incorrect tiger with the elephant, both tigers selected with or without the elephant selected, or no choice was made). Figure  reports the mean proportion correct and standard errors for each condition.  Figure  shows that the children performed above chance (%) in each condition.  They scored higher on sentences containing inanimate heads for all structural types except for the oblique structure.  Additionally, they appeared to perform marginally better overall on the subject and object RCs than on the oblique RCs.  The data were analyzed using Generalized Linear Mixed Models (Baayen, Davidson & Bates, .  Jaeger, ), which were calculated using the lme package for Linear Mixed Effects (Bates & Maechler, ) in R (version . ·.  R Core Development Team, ).  Factor labels were centred at  with a range of .  An initial model that included (zero-centred) age and gender as independent variables showed that these two variables did not significantly influence performance.  These variables were not included in subsequent analyses.  We fitted a model to the data that included the independent variables of structure ( levels.  (i) subject RC, (ii) object RC, (iii) oblique RC, and (iv) oblique RC) and animacy ( levels.  animate, inanimate), as well as participants and items as random effects.  Random slope parameters for main effects and interactions were included in the models using forward selection.  each random slope was added sequentially to the model, first for participants and then items, and the ANOVA function was used to determine whether the additional random slope significantly improved the model (Baayen, ).  None of the random slopes improved the fit of the model and were therefore not included.  Additionally, the structure × animacy interaction did not improve the fit of the model (χ = ·, df=, p = ·) and was therefore removed.  The final model results are shown in Table .  Table  shows that animacy significantly affected children’s performance.  across all sentence types children performed better on sentences that contained inanimate head nouns.  Subject RCs were comprehended marginally better than the oblique RCs, but the overall differences between performance on the subject RCs and the object and oblique RCs were not significant.  Subsequent analyses revealed that the children’s performance on the object RCs was significantly better overall than on the oblique RCs (β = –·, z = –·, p = ·) but not the oblique RCs (β = –·, z = –·, p = ·).  There was no difference in performance on the oblique and oblique RCs (β = ·, z = ·, p = ·).  Error analysis.  When children erred they most often chose the incorrect token of the head referent (% of responses), although the frequency of this response did not differ across conditions.  The children also sometimes chose the distractor (%) or made a selection that was coded as ‘Other’ (%).  Table  lists the frequencies of these error types by condition.  DISCUSSION.  The results from Study  suggest that, overall, three- to four-year-old Finnish-speaking children comprehend different types of RC structures very well.  Based on our corpus analysis (Study ), and due to typical animacy features of subject and object entities (Fox & Thompson, ), we predicted that Finnish children would not show an overall subject– object asymmetry, but that they would show animacy effects.  Consistent with our prediction, we did not find evidence of subject–object asymmetry, not even in the in the condition where the head and embedded NP were both animate (e. g.  Friedmann et al. , .  Kidd et al. , ).  Note also that, due to the nature of Finnish, each noun in the background sentences for each target sentence type (subject, object, oblique) was inflected (e. g.  NOM, PART, INE, ALL).  The main clause of each test sentence had the same structure Anna mulle se X ‘Give me the X-ACC/ NOM’.  This means that the only sentence type in which the target head noun had the same case marking in the background and the target sentences were subject RCs (see examples ()–()).  Furthermore, the only sentence type in which both nouns within the RC were inflected exactly as they were in the background sentences were animate subject RCs.  If we assume that children are yet to acquire an adultlike case-marking system at the age of . –.  (e. g.  Krajewski, Lieven & Theakston, .  Krajewski, Theakson, Lieven & Tomasello, ), the mismatch in noun forms between background and target sentences may have made it more difficult for the children to process object and oblique targets, as not only did the children have to determine the meaning of the background and target sentences, they also had to pay attention to the differing forms of the key lexical item in these.  Regardless of this potential extra layer of difficulty in object and oblique RCs, no subject–object asymmetry was found.  The only structure type that created a marginally increased level of difficultly were oblique targets, which were driven by the children’s relatively high error rate when choosing referents for animate oblique targets (e. g.  “Give me the cockerel for/to whom the girl read”).  The children’s performance in this condition may have been affected by the relative pronoun kenelle, whose frequency in adult–child conversation is relatively low in comparison to the relative pronouns in our other conditions.  The main effect of animacy showed that the children performed best when sentences contained an inanimate head, which did not interact with structure type.  This result reflects our frequency analysis in Study , but might be considered surprising with reference to the assumption that animate entities make good subjects (Fox & Thompson, ).  That is, one might have expected better performance with animate subject than non-subjectPerformance in the animate subject RC condition (similarly to kenelle above) may have been affected by our relative pronoun kuka.  Even though this pronoun is relatively frequent in Finnish, its frequency is somewhat lower than that of our animate object relativizer.  Thus, this decrement in performance may be due to experience-based phenomena.  Inconsistent with assumptions of animacy characteristics of subject and non-subject entities (Fox & Thompson, ), we did not find the children perform better with inanimate non-subject than subject RCs.  The fact that we controlled for the noun types and used only lexical nouns across our test sentences (subject, object, oblique, and oblique RCs) could explain this effect, given that several studies suggest that inanimate object relatives are easier to comprehend if the embedded subject is a pronoun than a noun (e. g.  .  .  .  the dog that I stroked) (e. g.  Gordon, Hendrick & Johnson, , .  Kidd et al. , .  Warren & Gibson, ).  Thus, the fact that our test sentences consisted of embedded noun subjects (e. g.  granddad instead of he) might have hindered the children’s performance with inanimate non-subject RCs.  Last, we did not find oblique relatives to be more difficult than the other RC structures.  Our Finnish comprehension data therefore do not support Diessel and Tomasello’s () suggestion that increased structural complexity in terms of the relativizer form used results in children finding oblique sentences more difficult than the other RC structures (subject, object, oblique).  This finding is difficult to accommodate within the usage-based approach, since oblique relatives were largely absent from our corpus data. 