INTRODUCTION.  In the course of typical language development children produce relative clauses as early as around three years of age (Crain, McKee & Emiliani, .  Diessel & Tomasello, .  Jisa & Kern, .  Limber, ).  However, research suggests that across languages their comprehension of the same structures does not emerge until two to three years later (de Villiers, Tager-Flusberg, Hakkuta & Cohen, .  Goodluck & Tavakolian, .  Håkansson & Hansson, .  Sheldon, ).  The majority of the comprehension studies cited here use a toy manipulation paradigm where the child uses toys to act out a spoken sentence, and although significant variation is reported within their results, studies that compare production and comprehension directly (using a number of methodologies) (e. g.  Håkansson & Hansson, ) have also reported superior production skills.  This pattern of development for complex clauses contrasts with the usual finding that comprehension precedes production (Leonard, ), raising questions about how comprehension of these structures is assessed.  In everyday discourse, comprehension can often be achieved even if a heard sentence is only partially processed, by using context and prior knowledge to infer meaning.  Formal tests of syntactic knowledge, however, typically are devised to reduce or even abolish use of context, forcing the listener to process the incoming sentence completely.  Instruments have been devised to assess language comprehension by using a multiple-choice format that in effect forces the listener to form a semantic representation that relies on the syntactic structure to assign thematic roles to all the content words in a sentence.  Clinical instruments typically use a one in four picture layout (one picture representing the target structure and the other three considered distractors) to reduce the probability of choosing the correct item by chance.  In addition, this layout reduces the number of exemplars required to test each item effectively, thereby avoiding an assessment of unreasonable length.  Using this approach, it is possible to devise test items that can only be interpreted by those with a deep knowledge of the construction under test.  At the same time, however, the multiple-choice format has the drawback that it introduces elements into the task that may lead to failure for reasons other than lack of linguistic competence.  Consider the items shown in Figures a, b, and c.  If a child is able to select the correct response in a set of items such as these, this is good evidence that they are able to analyze the relative clause construction to assign thematic roles to the lexical items in the sentence.  If, however, they fail, this could be due to non-linguistic factors, such as difficulty holding the sentence in memory while comparing the four pictured items, which are perceptually as well as linguistically confusing.  The presence of three distractors adds a linguistic as well as cognitive load to the task.  Linguistically, not only is the child required to map the semantic roles on to the syntactic structure, but they must also rule out three competing alternative mappings.  The ability to rule out competing structures is likely to be influenced by other executive functions such as selective attention and inhibition.  Because of these concerns, it may be unwise to rely solely on this type of multiple-choice test to assess knowledge of complex syntax.  Other approaches to assessment are possible, but each will have its own biases and complexities.  For instance, we could use the method employed in most of the comprehension studies cited above, in which the task is to act out a spoken sentence.  However, act-out tasks have also been criticized on the basis that they may underestimate children’s knowledge due to a competing acting bias (McDaniel & McKee, ), i. e.  children’s desire to play with the toys rather than follow the instructions they hear.  In addition, it has been suggested that an act-out methodology unnecessarily complicates the child’s task and that many used experimentally have violated appropriate pragmatic conditions by not providing a set of referents from which a subset can be distinguished (Hamburger & Crain, ).  One assessment method that has been widely used in recent years to assess grammatical knowledge is sentence repetition.  Although at first glance this might seem to be a measure simply of the ability to repeat a string of words, a large body of research shows that this is not the case.  Immediate sentence repetition has been shown to be reflective of language behaviour in natural settings (Gallimore & Tharpe, ), and both immediate and delayed repetition have been found to discriminate effectively between second language learners across different proficiency levels (see review by Yan, Maeda, Lv & Ginther, ).  As far back as the late s, researchers such as Slobin and Welsh () and Clay () argued that if sentence length exceeds an individual’s short-term memory word span (the number of words they can repeat in a list), repetition will require a reliance on linguistic knowledge in long-term memory.  They argued that sentence repetition reflects an individual’s underlying grammatical competence, in that a person’s syntactic knowledge assists them in ‘chunking’ components of the sentence, which facilitates the recall process.  Therefore, sentences that exceed a child’s short-term memory span are likely to be processed for meaning when produced successfully (Naiman, .  Slobin & Welsh, .  Vinther, ).  More recently, Riches () suggested that the roles of short- and long-term memory are not length dependent, but that they work effectively together at all sentence lengths.  Researchers are now converging on the view that sentence repetition is not purely a task of reproducing a heard series of words, but that it is supported by conceptual, lexical, and syntactic representations in long-term memory (Brown & Hulme, .  Hulme, Maughan & Brown .  Klem, Melby-Lervag, Hagtvet, Lyster, Gustafsson & Hulme, .  Potter & Lombardi, , .  Schweickert, ), as well as by phonological short-term memory processes (Alloway & Gathercole, .  Hanten & Martin, .  McCarthy & Warrington, .  Rummer & Engelkamp ).  In addition, a number of researchers have highlighted the link between sentence repetition and syntactic competence in children.  Using immediate recall of subject and object relative clauses, Kidd, Brandt, Lieven, and Tomasello () found that manipulating complexity while maintaining sentence length resulted in children making a greater number of sentence repetition errors.  This was also the case in research carried out by Frizelle and Fletcher (), using the full range of relative clause types.  while length remained constant, children found it increasingly difficult to immediately recall sentences as the complexity of the structure increased.  The implication here is that these difficulties cannot be explained by differences in short-term phonological memory but by the underlying syntactic competence or representations in long-term memory.  The relationship between syntactic competence and sentence repetition ability is further reinforced in a recent study by Polišenská, Chiat, and Roy ().  These authors investigated how different types of long-term linguistic knowledge contribute to children’s immediate recall ability.  They manipulated seven different linguistic conditions ranging from sequences of non-words to full grammatical sentences to evaluate how each condition affected children’s span.  They found that children’s morphosyntactic knowledge played the largest role in children’s immediate recall capacity.  children obtained a mean span of over · words longer for grammatical than ungrammatical sentences, compared to an increased span of just · for real words vs.  non-words and less than  for sentences that were either semantically plausible or not.  Other researchers have directly compared children’s performance on sentence repetition tasks to their spontaneous use of grammar.  Geers and Moog () reported a strong correlation between the average immediate sentence repetition error scores (from children aged four to fifteen years) and those derived from Developmental Sentence Scoring (DSS) (Lee, ) – a measure of grammatical complexity in spontaneous language use.  In addition, McDade, Simpson, and Lamb () reported a very strong correlation between the performance of four-year-old children on a sentence repetition task (with a -second time lapse following each sentence) and their DSS performance.  The research we have cited, coupled with the current thinking on the underlying mechanisms involved in sentence repetition, would lead us to conclude that sentence repetition is a reliable measure of children’s grammatical knowledge.  However, few studies have directly compared children’s sentence repetition performance with their understanding of grammatical structures.  The question that we consider here is how far there is agreement between sentence repetition and multiple-choice comprehension measures of competence with a type of complex sentence, relative clause constructions.  There are three aspects to this question.  .  We can ask whether one task is generally easier than the other.  On the one hand, we might expect a comprehension task to be easier because it does not require the child to engage language production systems, and because the presence of pictures should ease the memory load on the child, as the pictures provide a permanent concrete representation of the lexical items in the sentence.  On the other hand, a repetition task does not necessitate that the sentence be assigned a semantic interpretation.  Interestingly, when McDade et al.  () investigated children’s sentence recall ability as a function of sentence comprehension, they found that children could repeat sentences that they did not understand.  In their study, six children (aged .  to . ) were required to repeat sixteen sentences in three conditions.  (a) immediate repetition followed by a request to point to the picture corresponding to that sentence (from Carrow’s () Test for the Auditory Comprehension of Language).  (b) immediate selection of the corresponding picture followed by repetition of the sentence.  and (c) repetition of the sentence following a -second delay.  They concluded that immediate sentence recall might in fact overestimate children’s language ability.  However, many of the sentences could have been considered to be within children’s span and the sample size was small.  .  A further question is whether the two methods agree in terms of the order of difficulty of specific constructions.  If they do, then this would indicate that, despite any overall differences between repetition and comprehension, both methods are indexing a core aspect of language knowledge.  .  Children show individual variation in their task performance, raising the question of whether children vary in their syntactic competence, or whether such differences can be largely attributed to differences in non-linguistic performance factors (e. g.  attention, impulsivity, etc. ).  We would expect performance factors to vary according to task demands, and so be different for repetition and comprehension tasks.  Thus, if large individual differences are found but are consistent from task to task, this would indicate that variable syntactic competence is the main factor responsible for variation between children.  If, however, there are individual differences that are inconsistent across repetition and comprehension, this would suggest that non-linguistic performance factors have a large impact on children’s scores.  We show here that we can distinguish these possibilities by looking at individual differences across tasks, and that it is possible to model the alternative scenarios to show which provides a better fit to observed data.  <Middle>Participants.  Thirty-three typically developing children participated in the study.  Of those initially recruited, two were excluded due to failing the hearing screening test, and one due to being absent on the second assessment day.  The participating children were between the ages of .  and .  (mean age . ) and were recruited through primary schools in Cork city, Southern Ireland.  The Cork Teaching Hospitals Ethics Committee granted written ethical approval for the study.  Parents and children were required to give written consent and assent as appropriate.  Children were included on the basis that they had never been referred for speech and language therapy.  had typical language abilities (based on teacher and parental reports).  spoke English as their first language and the language of the home.  and had no known neurological or hearing difficulties.  The latter was screened for on the first day of assessment and children were required to pass three frequencies ( Hz,  Hz, and  Hz) at a  dB level in both ears.  Experimental tasks.  Comprehension task.  The comprehension task was a multiple-choice sentence–picture matching task designed to assess children’s understanding of the full range of relative clause structures.  subject (both intransitive and transitive), object, indirect object, oblique genitive subject, and genitive object (for a more detailed description of relative clause types see Frizelle and Fletcher, ).  The protocol assessed fifty-six relative clauses with two matrix clause types.  twenty-eight relative clauses were attached to the predicate nominal of a copular clause (containing a single proposition) and twenty-eight to the direct object of a transitive clause (full bi-clausal relatives).  There were therefore four examples of each relative clause type ( × ) attached to both types of matrix clause.  We included single propositional relatives, as these are the most common relative clauses to occur in young children’s naturalistic speech (Diessel & Tomasello, ).  Sentences were all between  and  syllables in length.  We considered matching the stimuli on length but this would necessitate padding out some clause types with redundant words such as adjectives or adverbs.  For example, it is natural that an indirect object relative would be longer than an object relative as the former contains an additional object.  Given that the main aim of the study was to compare repetition and comprehension using a range of clause types, control of sentence length was not critical, so we allowed sentence length to be determined by the relative clause type.  An example of the test sentences is given in Table .  The test sentences were chosen on the basis of previous work carried out by Diessel and Tomasello (, ) and Frizelle and Fletcher () indicating a performance hierarchy in children’s ability to recall these sentence structures.  Based on the British National Corpus, the sentences included high-frequency nouns and verbs.  These were cross-referenced with the English MacArthur Bates Communicative Development Inventory (CDI.  Fenson, Marchman, Thal, Dale, Reznick & Bates, ) to ensure an early age of acquisition.  The sentences were also modified to account for research carried out by Kidd et al.  () on the discourse regularities of young children’s use of relative clauses, i. e.  all object relatives had an inanimate head noun and a pronominal subject.  Pronominal subjects were also used in the oblique, indirect object, and genitive relative clause structures as they were considered to be more reflective of natural discourse.  Children were presented with each sentence orally and were asked to choose the picture (froma choice of four) that corresponded to that sentence. Theother three images were distractors.  The pictures were presented in three formats determined by the relative clause type.  Relative clauses with a single proposition were illustrated as in Figure a, with a choice of four pictures, one of which represents the given sentence and the other three representing the distractors.  Unlike full bi-clausal relatives, the initial verb in a single propositional relative clause usually serves as an attention getter, or in this case as a formulaic instruction to the child.  In this sense one sentence is not truly embedded into the other.  If given the instruction “Point to the cup that he broke”, we are asking the child to point to the head noun about which the relative clause is giving more information.  The more accurate response is therefore to point to ‘a cup’ rather than ‘a man breaking a cup’.  For this reason, these constructions were presented with a character or object strip of each referent (head noun) to choose from.  However, if the child pointed to the main picture this was also scored as correct.  Distractors for these sentences included reversed roles, verb/object distractor, or a relative clause subject distractor.  Full bi-clausal relatives were represented as in Figures b and c.  Structures such as that illustrated in c required a two-picture format, as ‘the woman’ needs to have made the jumper before ‘he’ can try it on.  Distractors for the full bi-clausal relatives included role reversal of the main clause (the relative clause is understood), role reversal of the relative clause (the main clause is understood), and role reversal of both main and relative clause.  These distractors are illustrated in Figures b and c.  Sentence recall task.  The sentence recall task included the same sentences as those assessed in the comprehension task previously described.  We decided to use live voice rather than prerecorded sentences as this helped engage these young children more readily in the task.  The same examiner administered both assessments with all children, ensuring a level of consistency.  Children were introduced to the task as a puppet game in which they had to repeat sentences ‘like a parrot’.  Procedure.  Children were assessed individually in a quiet room in their respective schools.  The assessments were administered in two sessions within one week of each other.  The sequence of test sentences (including practice items) was randomized for both experimental tasks so that there were two orders of presentation for each task.  The order in which the assessments were administered was also randomized such that half the participants completed the repetition task followed by the comprehension task, and the other half completed the tasks in the reverse order.  For the multiple-choice task, children listened to a sentence and were required to point to the picture that corresponded to that sentence.  For the sentence repetition task, the researcher read individual sentences and children were required to repeat them verbatim.  Repetitions were allowed for both assessment protocols if background noise was evident or if it was clear that the child had not heard the test sentence properly.  This resulted in a minimal number of repetitions required (less than % of the total number of test sentences).  Positive feedback was given after each response regardless of the child’s performance on either task.  The multiple-choice task was scored in real time as the children completed it.  The scoring system was binary.   for a correct response and  if the response was incorrect.  The sentence repetition task was recorded using a Zoom H audio-recorder.  The responses were stored on computer for transcription and analysis. 