I N T R O D U C T I O N, English-speaking children tend to produce grammatical errors as part of normal development.  These errors can include omission of tense and agreement (tense/agreement) markers, such as Mom hug me instead of Mom hugs me.  Pronoun errors are also observed, and in English are evidenced as case errors, as in Her hug Elmo instead of She hugs Elmo.  Children may also produce errors such as Her hugs Elmo but generative grammar accounts of grammatical development have suggested that these errors should occur rarely or never (Wexler, Schütze & Rice, ).  Other accounts of language development have suggested that productions like Her hugs Elmo may actually occur more often than previously expected, and that inﬂuences of language input may help to explain why these error patterns occur (Ambridge & Pine, .  Coker, Pine & Gobet, .  Pelham, .  Pine, Joseph & Conti-Ramsden, .  Pine, Rowland, Lieven & Theakston, ).  This study was designed to examine whether pronoun case and tense/agreement features can be inﬂuenced by factors in the input.  Optional use of tense/agreement and pronoun errors.  Analysis of longitudinal language samples from young English-speaking children has revealed that most typically developing children often omit tense/agreement morphemes from obligatory contexts for some period of time after they begin combining words into phrases (e. g.  Rice, Wexler & Hershberger, .  Rispoli, Hadley & Holt, ).  Wexler and his colleagues have described this as the optional inﬁnitive (OI) period (Rice, Wexler & Cleave, .  Rice et al. , .  Wexler, ).  According to these investigators, young children have knowledge of syntax but fail to understand that verbs must be ﬁnite in main clauses.  As a result, they alternate between using tense/agreement forms appropriately and using a non-ﬁnite form in their place.  Aﬀected forms include present third person singular -s (e. g.  Mommy hugs me / Mommy hug me), copula be forms (e. g.  Mommy is nice / Mommy nice), auxiliary be forms (e. g.  Mommy is hugging me / Mommy hugging me), and past -ed (e. g.  Mommy hugged me / Mommy hug me) (Wexler, ).  Typically developing children may remain in the OI stage until four or ﬁve years of age before using tense/agreement markers in more than % of obligatory contexts (Rice & Wexler, a, b, c.  Rice et al. , ).  Wexler and his colleagues later reﬁned their explanation for how the OI phase ﬁts within the generative grammar framework by proposing the Agreement/Tense Omission Model (ATOM.  Schütze & Wexler, .  Wexler et al. , ).  According to the ATOM, when children in the OI period overtly mark agreement features on a verb (e. g.  walks) they should also use a correct nominative case pronoun (e. g.  He walks).  But if children produce a verb without overt agreement (e. g.  walk) in a context that requires it, they may produce either a nominative (e. g.  he) or non-nominative (e. g.  him) subject pronoun.  Note that agreement markers in English also mark tense.  therefore, unless both agreement and tense appear in the underlying syntax, the morpheme cannot be expressed.  If agreement is represented without tense, nominative case is licensed even though the absence of tense prevents expression of the fused tense/agreement inﬂection (resulting in He walk).  Conversely, if tense is represented without agreement, nominative case is not licensed and the default form for English (accusative or objective case) is used (e. g.  Him walk).  This distinction between agreement and tense provides an explanation for why some children are observed to produce utterances such as Him talked.  Such utterances presumably lack agreement (accounting for the use of him rather than he) but, because -ed marks tense only, its expression is not blocked by the lack of agreement.  Although the ATOM can account for a range of attested child language productions, this model provides no basis for expecting an utterance such as Him walks because the presence of the inﬂection -s implies the presence of agreement, which should license nominative case.  If such errors occur, they should be infrequent and the result of a language production performance error, according to this account.  The same expectations arise for other tense/agreement morphemes. 