I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Children’s acquisition of a verb lexicon forms a crucial interface between lexical and grammatical development (Pinker, .  Tomasello, ).  Verbs emerge later than nouns and occupy a smaller percentage of the initial lexicon (Bates et al. , .  Nelson, ).  Theoretically, verb acquisition may be more difficult than noun acquisition.  First, verbs involve conceptually more complicated notions (cf.  Gleitman, Cassidy, Nappa, Papafragou & Trueswell, ).  Whereas early common nouns denote entities, verbs denote event structures.  The meaning of verbs must encode relationships between the event and one or more noun phrases, also known as arguments.  Second, information in the input may provide more support for the acquisition of nouns relative to verbs.  Nouns in the input tend to be aligned with the physical objects they refer to, but verbs in the input may not be ‘time locked’ to the events they describe (Gleitman et al. , ).  Finally, “verb acquisition entails the learning of sentence frames” (Hadley, , p.  ).  To learn a verb meaning is to learn what noun phrase arguments are involved and how to arrange the verb and the arguments in the correct sequence (Pinker, .  Rice, ).  In this sense, the expansion of the verb lexicon provides a foundation for the development of simple, diverse sentences (Hadley, ).  Despite the importance of the verb lexicon to children’s language development, few studies have investigated how input affects children’s verb acquisition, and different research traditions have approached this question from distinct perspectives.  One research tradition in developmental and educational psychology has focused on understanding relationships between language input and individual differences in children’s rate of vocabulary development.  These input studies have established the associations between lexical quantity and lexical diversity in parent input and children’s general vocabulary development (Hoff & Naigles, .  Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer & Lyons, .  Huttenlocher, Waterfall, Vasilyeva, Vevea & Hedges, .  Rowe, ).  By the third year of life, lexical diversity in parent input has been shown to be a stronger predictor of children’s later vocabulary abilities than the sheer quantity of words in parent input (Rowe, ).  However, it is not clear whether such relationships hold specifically for the verb lexicon.  An alternative approach, influenced by psycholinguistic theories of language acquisition, has focused on the problem of how children learn verb meanings.  Theories of SYNTACTIC BOOTSTRAPPING have proposed that children are sensitive to verb-related syntactic and morphological cues, as these cues may serve to restrict verb meanings (Behrend, Harris & Cartwright, .  Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz & Gleitman, .  Naigles & Swensen, .  Yuan, Fisher & Snedeker, ).  However, little is known about the nature of these structural cues in naturalistic parent input and how parents vary in providing verb-related structural cues to their children.  The current study integrated these two research traditions by investigating the contribution of lexical quantity, lexical diversity, and verb-related structural cues in parent input to children’s subsequent expressive verb diversity.  The methods used in early input studies were primarily observational, with studies documenting correlations between features of naturalistic parent speech at Time  and children’s progress in language development between Time  and Time  (see Richards, , and Valian, , for comprehensive reviews).  More recent studies have associated parent input quantity and diversity with children’s language development (Hoff & Naigles, .  Huttenlocher et al. , , .  Rowe, ).  For example, Hoff and Naigles () studied sixty-three children who ranged in age from .  to . .  Time  parent input measures, specifically the number of total words, the number of different words, and mean length of utterance (MLU) in morphemes, were positively associated with children’s Time  vocabulary size obtained  weeks later.  Huttenlocher et al.  () reported converging results using a more sophisticated measure of children’s vocabulary GROWTH for twenty-two children from .  to . .  After controlling for child gender, Huttenlocher and colleagues found that approximately % of the variance in children’s rate of vocabulary acceleration was accounted for by the number of total words in the parent input.  Huttenlocher et al.  () adopted a similar longitudinal design, following the children from .  to . .  They found that both lexical and grammatical development were predicted by parent input quantity and diversity.  Additionally, Huttenlocher and colleagues revealed bi-directional influences with children’s language abilities accounting for later lexical measures of parent input.  This means that parents were not only exerting an influence on children’s later language development, but they were also adjusting their vocabulary input to their children’s levels of lexical development.  However, bi-directional influences were not apparent for the grammatical measures.  Most recently, Rowe () examined the contribution of parent input quantity and diversity to children’s vocabulary abilities one year later on a standardized measure of receptive vocabulary knowledge.  Different input properties emerged as better predictors of children’s vocabulary scores at different time points.  Parent input quantity at .  was most strongly related to children’s vocabulary scores at . , whereas input richness in both vocabulary diversity and sophistication at .  were stronger predictors of the subsequent vocabulary scores at . .  These findings underscore the importance of children’s exposure to diverse words in parent input during the third year of life.  Other input studies have been inspired by the SYNTACTIC BOOTSTRAPPING HYPOTHESIS, focusing on verb-related structural cues such as syntactic frames or morphological contexts that may support children’s verb acquisition (de Villiers, .  Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg, , ).  SYNTACTIC BOOTSTRAPPING refers to a process by which children restrict verb meanings according to the structural environments in which verbs occur (Gleitman, .  Landau & Gleitman, .  Naigles & Swensen, ).  Structural cues tend to correspond with verb semantics (Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg, , ).  For example, verbs involving agent-andpatient relations such as take and push usually occur in the transitive frame (Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg, ).  In experimental studies, children show sensitivity to structural cues such as the number of arguments attached to verbs or the morphological contexts of verbs (Behrend et al. , .  Fisher et al. , .  Yuan et al. , ).  The hypothesis is that the more different structural cues a verb co-occurs with, the earlier the verb will emerge in the lexicon.  Children may also use the verb in more different ways.  Guided by the syntactic bootstrapping hypothesis, Naigles and HoffGinsberg (, ) investigated fifty-seven parent–child dyads and collected naturalistic conversations at home.  The relationship between Time  parents’ verb use and Time  children’s verb production was examined, with a -week interval between Time  and Time .  The input sample at Time  was constructed by combining the fifty-seven parent speech samples into a single input corpus, with each parent providing the same number of utterances (i. e.  ).  The child speech sample at Time  was constructed by combining the fifty-seven child speech samples into a single child corpus, with each child contributing ninety utterances.  Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg examined the emergence of twenty-five commonly used verbs in parent input and child speech, analyzing the verb frequency and the verb-related syntactic frames in the pooled input sample.  They coded two types of syntactic frames, the ‘broad syntactic frames’ and the ‘narrow syntactic frames’.  The broad frames identified verbs for transitivity, postverbal sentences, postverbal prepositional phrases, and adverbs.  Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg showed that the broad frames in parent input were reliable cues to the verb semantics.  For example, % of all input sentences containing the transitivity frame had main verbs that indicated agent-and-patient relations.  Likewise, % of input sentences with a post-verbal sentence frame had main verbs that referred to internal states such as think and know.  Finally, % of input sentences with postverbal prepositional phrases had main verbs that denoted physical motions such as come and go.  In a second analysis, Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg used the narrow frames to identify the SEQUENCE of non-head materials of the target verb phrases.  This was hypothesized to reflect the potential parsing strategies children with rudimentary syntax might adopt when listening to input.  Using the narrow syntactic frame coding, Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg showed that the frequency of individual verbs in the Time  child speech was significantly correlated with Time  input verb frequency and the narrow syntactic frame diversity.  The regression analysis suggested that Time  input verb frequency explained % of the variance in Time  verb frequency in child production, and the narrow syntactic frame diversity accounted for an additional % of the variance beyond the input verb frequency.  Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg interpreted this finding as evidence that using multiple syntactic frames with verbs facilitates verb learning.  Of interest to the current study was whether syntactic frame diversity would also support children’s verb acquisition when applied to individual parent–child dyads, a question that Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg did not ask.  In another study of structural cues, de Villiers () investigated the relationship between parent input and children’s production of verb morphology with two parent–child dyads.  Language samples were collected through bi-weekly -hour sessions at home in a series of ten sessions.  The input sample was constructed for each child by combining the mother’s speech in the first five sessions.  Both parents’ and children’s verb use were coded for their immediately adjacent morphemes, with thirteen morphological contexts identified.  Examples are third person singular present tense -s, present progressive tense V-ing, or regular past tense -ed.  Only verbs that were shared between the parent input and the child output were analyzed.  Children’s morphological variety of verb use was regressed on children’s verb frequency, input verb frequency, and input morphological variety of verb use.  Separate regression analyses for the two children revealed similar results.  Morphological variety of verb use in the parent input was the only significant predictor for both parent– child dyads.  Furthermore, de Villiers found that each child’s production was predicted by their own mother’s verb use, but not by that of the other mother.  De Villiers suggested that the input and the output of individual parent–child dyads were unique to the dyad, and not to more general properties of parent input to children.  Though Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg () and de Villiers () demonstrated that verb-related syntactic frames and morphological contexts in parent input are helpful for children to learn verbs, these studies have several limitations.  First, methodological choices in study design temper the strength of the generalizations that can be drawn.  Recall that Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg used pooled speech samples of maternal input and child output to study how input properties influenced the acquisition of DIFFERENT VERBS.  Their study was not designed to examine the contribution of differences in parent input to between-child differences in verb diversity.  The findings therefore cannot be generalized to the verb acquisition of individual children.  In contrast, de Villiers examined individual parent–child dyads, but the sample size (two dyads) was very small.  Second, Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg did not provide a clear rationale for assessing narrow syntactic frame diversity as a parent input property.  Given that they stated “it is not obvious how these narrow frame differences might translate into meaning differences for the children” (Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg, , p.  ), the measure of narrow frame diversity seems to lack a solid theoretical basis.  Third, these studies examined only a subset of common verbs.  And finally, the relationship between the children’s verb use and parents’ verb use was not controlled.  Based on findings of Huttenlocher et al.  (), it is important to consider the possibility of bi-directional influences from child to parent, as well as parent to child.  In summary, two gaps are apparent in our understanding of how naturalistic input contributes to children’s verb acquisition.  First, it is not clear whether the relationships that exist between input quantity, input diversity, and children’s lexical development hold specifically for verbs.  Second, much less is known about how verb-related structural cues are used in naturalistic parent input, such as syntactic frame diversity and morphological context diversity.  Whether these cues provide additional benefit to increase children’s verb lexicon remains uncertain.  The current study addressed these issues by investigating the contribution of parent input to children’s subsequent verb diversity.  Conventional measures of verb input quantity and diversity were included, as well as theoretically motivated measures of syntactic and morphological context diversity (de Villiers, .  Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg, , ).  In addition, we expected children’s prior developmental abilities to influence subsequent verb acquisition.  Children who used more different words early in development were anticipated to produce more different verbs six months later.  Controlling for initial vocabulary abilities was also important in light of Huttenlocher et al. ’s () evidence of bi-directional influences between children’s vocabulary abilities and lexical properties of parent input.  Children’s intelligibility and talkativity during conversations were also considered, because these factors might influence parent input.  Finally, child gender was considered, because Huttenlocher et al.  () reported that gender influenced the rate of lexical development, with girls accelerating more quickly than boys before . .  The following four research questions were explored.  .  Are measures of children’s .  developmental abilities associated with their .  verb diversity.  This question explored the evidence for general continuity in early language development.  .  Are measures of children’s .  developmental abilities associated with .  parent input measures.  This question addressed whether parent input is related to concurrent children’s abilities.  .  Are the .  parent input verb quantity, verb diversity, and verb-related structural cues associated with children’s .  verb diversity.  This question explored different dimensions of parent verb input that may influence children’s subsequent verb production.  .  Do parent input verb measures at age .  predict children’s verb diversity at age .  when children’s .  developmental abilities are controlled.  This question addressed the contribution of parent input to children’s subsequent verb acquisition above and beyond the contribution of the children’s developmental abilities.  <Middle> METHODS.  Participants.  Participants for the current study were selected from an existing longitudinal database funded by the Natural Science Foundation (NSF.  Rispoli & Hadley, ).  Fifty-eight families were originally recruited for a study of the acquisition of tense and agreement in toddlers between .  and .  in English monolingual homes.  Children with congenital or acquired neurological or sensory impairments, insertion of pressure equalization tubes as a result of repeated bouts of otitis media, or delayed onset of walking or talking (i. e. 