INTRODUCTION.  This study has both theoretical and investigative aims, with the theme of this Special Issue providing an impetus to pause and rethink its potential contribution to knowledge.  In terms of theory, the aim is to contribute to dialogue about research in the global South, encompassing research on gender, sexuality and language and to do so while focussing on New Zealand’s idiosyncratic, unsettled ‘global Southern’ status (i. e.  New Zealand as potentially representing both ‘the North in the South’ and ‘the South in the North’).  In terms of investigative aims, this study queries masculinity performance in a classroom-based community of practice and its relationship with sexuality, colonial hegemony and heteronormativity.  Crucially for this Special Issue, Hokowhitu (2008) has pointed out in the context of New Zealand that gendered and sexual identity practices in the Paciﬁc region might remain incomprehensible to Northern epistemologies of gender theory.  In the present study, by primarily focusing on liminal moments instigated by young men who are New Zealand born Cook Island, Niuean and Samoan transnationals, I explore this possibility.  Empirically, the study aims to heuristically separate New Zealand from the global North as a provisional strategy for making processes of gender and sexuality visible that might otherwise be difﬁcult to perceive in the shadow of globalisation and Northern theoretical hegemony.  A corollary of this aim is to address issues of knowledge and power between New Zealand and less controversially ‘Southern’ scholarship in what is often referred to as ‘the Paciﬁc’ (Jolly 2008a).  Therefore, following other scholars in the region, for example research in Hawaiʻi (Chen 2014) and Vanuatu and the Cook Islands (Jolly 2008b), I align here with Hauʻofa (2008) in using the term ‘Oceanic’ to stress the connections and similarities between various experiences in different parts of the Paciﬁc Islands (or Oceania) instead of essentialising their differences.  The term Oceanic also captures the phenomenon of ‘world enlargement’ (Hauʻofa 1993.  6).  This term of Hauʻofa’s refers to a tendency for Paciﬁc Island peoples to outline their worlds based on the lines of exchange drawn between members of their extended families who live around the Paciﬁc Rim.  Besnier, researching in Tonga, has called these dispersed, kinship-based communities ‘transnational enclaves’, which he describes as being loosely organised networks that span continents and national borders (1997.  19).  This notion of world enlargement is a Paciﬁc perspective of globalisation in which Paciﬁc peoples occupy a world larger than the geographic spaces and the international boundaries within which they dwell (Wendt Samu 2010).  By incorporating Oceanic theories of interconnectedness and this Oceanic expanded view of the world, I can focus on how observed practices might challenge Northern-inspired theorisations.  Focusing on linguistic and discursive practices, the ultimate goal is not to essentialise observed patterns as post-colonial or Southern but rather to examine how local sociolinguistic systems in New Zealand and broader Oceania might articulate with or problematise Northern systems related to sex, gender, and sexuality.  This is not an attempt to eclipse indigenous scholarship or conﬂate it with non-indigenous theory from New Zealand (i. e.  in its role as ‘the North in the South’).  Neither is it an attempt to ‘hybridise’ indigenous critique with Northern theories and thereby hold my own critique up as superior to both (as cautioned against by Tuck and Yang 2012.  16).  Rather, it is an attempt to add a speciﬁc vantage point in a process for what Raewyn Connell (2014a.  539) has called ‘mutual learning and interactive thinking about theoretical questions’ and ‘creat[ing] spaces of theoretical discussion with many more voices and wider and deeper agendas’.  It is in this sense, here outlined, that I position this paper as an engagement in South-South dialogue, not to ‘indigenise’ non-indigenous New Zealand perspectives but instead in order to ultimately ‘talk back’ to Northern theory with an alternate voice.  SOUTHERN THEORY.  Connell (2007) has emphasised the need for South-South dialogue as an essential part of a critical project aiming to integrate knowledge systems from the periphery in order to resist a hegemonic relationship in which general theories are formed in the global North and the global South is mainly a locale to test those theories and gather data.  It is germane to consider how research on language and masculinity in New Zealand might appropriate the theories of the North whilst at the same time extending them in a symmetrical relationship (Rosa 2014).  Specifically, as Jolly (2008b.  6) suggests, I engage with Northern models of gender and sexuality while ‘bringing a particularly Oceanic inflection to the dialogue. ’ In the introduction, I suggested that New Zealand’s status as part of the global South is unsettled and controversial.  Some scholars (e. g.  Deumert and Lexander 2013) have questioned Australia’s inclusion in the global South presumably because Australia is a wealthy and powerful nation with academic traditions firmly grounded in (and contributing to) theory from the North.  However, in no way can New Zealand be considered a duplicate of its powerful neighbour to the west, despite continued membership in the British Commonwealth (indeed many incontrovertibly Southern nations remain members of that organisation, such as Seychelles, Papua New Guinea and Samoa).  In effect, New Zealand is continually peripheral to Australia’s antipodean ‘core’ and so any argument that New Zealand enjoys Australia’s level of influence is a difficult one to sustain.  Certainly, the Maori people of New Zealand, like the aboriginal people of Australia, are members of the global South ‘norm’ by most measures (as opposed to outliers).  Yet the Maori people have their own distinctive, and problematic, relationship with the nation state of New Zealand and its research (Tuhiwai Smith 2012).  In an effect referred to as ‘internal colonialism’ their situation is one in which they are outnumbered by the descendants of colonial settlers who have no North to return to.  thus it can be argued that global North and colony have become coextensive (Weaver 2005).  This indigenous sense of ongoing colonisation must not be collapsed into the South perhaps simply to end up perpetuating a problem outlined by Tuhiwai Smith (2012) in which the privileges of non-indigenous academics are upheld by leaving out the concerns and ways of knowing of indigenous peoples.  It is for these reasons that I question the fruitfulness and the ethics of conflating the ‘global South’ with indigeneity.  The Maori have been included at least symbolically in New Zealand from its first moments of independence, the Treaty of Waitangi between Maori and the Crown in 1840 promising the Maori status as British subjects, which was unusual practice in the empire at the time (Orange 2013).  Lieutenant Governor William Hobson proclaimed ‘He iwi kotahi tatou, we are now one people’ thereby instigating a relationship between Maori and Pakeha2 that is distinctive from the relationship between Maori and other peoples in New Zealand (MacLean 1999).  The Maori people have since resisted the assimilationism inherent in Hobson’s phrasing, but a focus on ‘two peoples in one country’ remains (Hill 2010.  294).  The distinctiveness and importance of indigenous perspectives under the Treaty of Waitangi, however, still allows space for the idea that the Tauiwi peoples (i. e.  ‘non-Maori’ of all races) of New Zealand have their own experiences of living and researching in a periphery.  To include Tauiwi researchers in a democratisation of the research imagination is not necessarily to argue for what Tuck and Yang (2012.  21) have called ‘settler moves to innocence – diversions, distractions, which relieve the settler of feelings of guilt or responsibility, and conceal the need to give up land or power or privilege’.  Rather, the goal is to remain cognizant of this mentioned need, continuing to pay close attention to indigenous critiques while trying to make a concerted contribution to the destabilisation of the current geopolitics of knowledge (instead of remaining tacitly complicit with them).  Thus, Manathunga (2011.  7) has called for scholars to make use of ‘the unresolved post-colonial tensions evident in our societies in Australia and Aotearoa New Zealand to .  .  .  create new spaces for Southern, Eastern and indigenous knowledges and methodologies’.  It is in this spirit of inclusion that I proceed with positioning New Zealand as part of the global South and frame this study as being in dialogue with ideas arising from ‘Oceanic’ scholarship while also keeping in mind that these same Southern ideas are in dialogue with the Northern-based theories that partly enable my analysis.  I propose that it is more useful to at least sometimes view New Zealand as Southern in tension with various indigenous Oceanic academic perspectives (e. g.  Maori, Cook Island, Hawaiian, and Samoan) as points of view in a SouthSouth dialogue.  I maintain that this need not be an inward-looking epistemology of New Zealand as indigenously Southern.  that is, it is not an attempt to re-theorise New Zealand as somehow unique or ahistorical and thereby to separate it from the inequalities of the neo-colonial world of today nor to isolate it from indigenous critique.  On the contrary, this in-between status that I propose is a way of exploiting the tension between New Zealand’s situated status as both marginally Northern and problematically Southern.  As a Tauiwi scholar myself, this positioning of New Zealand as simultaneously North-inSouth and South-in-North, and thus positioned at the margins of a space of shared theoretical discussion with indigenous perspectives, represents an uncertain site of vulnerability, but it is one that I embrace.  I do so in alignment with Milani (2014) who has asserted that by positioning ourselves, as researchers, at the margins, we can enable reflection concerning our contributions to knowledge.  As preparation for the coming analysis, the next sections outline briefly the history of Oceanic peoples in New Zealand, the role of ethnicity in schools, and the particularities of masculinity in New Zealand’s socio-historical context.  BACKGROUND.  PASIFIKA PEOPLES IN NEW ZEALAND.  Tangata Whenua, or the indigenous ‘people of the land’ – the Maori people – comprise about 15 percent of the population, and Tangata Pasifika, or Pacific Islanders – the people of Oceania – comprise about 7. 5 percent.  Both of these categories represent ‘umbrella’ terms that tend to invite deconstruction and contestation (Hill 2010).  Subsumed by the label Maori, for example, are the various distinctive iwi (extended kinship groups) that serve as the primary means of self-identification for indigenous people in New Zealand (Hill 2010).  Similarly, the term Pasifika subsumes people from diverse nations that are distinctive although very much linked by the Pacific Ocean throughout their history (Hauʻofa 1993).  The Cook Islands were annexed by New Zealand in 1901 and existed as a dependency of New Zealand until 1965.  Niue and Tokelau followed a similar course, though Tokelau remains a dependency today.  Samoa was administered as a United Nations trusteeship first by Britain (1914–1946) and then New Zealand until 1962.  In the mid-1960s, the bulk of the populations of the Cook Islands, Niue, and Tokelau migrated to New Zealand, already equipped with citizenship under ‘free association’, and Samoans began to migrate under a quota system that has been at times only loosely enforced (Smith 2012).  Since the beginning of this period of free association and somewhat open immigration quotas, the influence of Pasifika communities in New Zealand has steadily grown.  This change was primarily a result of their efforts to achieve economic progress and social inclusion in the aforementioned ‘one country two peoples’ model that had been negotiated in relation to the Treaty of Waitangi in its modern reincarnation.  Amongst the New Zealand-born population, identification with their parents’ homeland has widely varying salience, but due to the highly mobile and transnational nature of their kinship communities many have ongoing contact with extended family from their parents’ homeland and prioritise travel to those locales themselves where possible (Anae 2002).  This widely varying identification with Oceanic ethnic identities is evident among the participants in the current study to some extent, but it has been challenging to discern their ethnic self-identifications because of an overall reticence in the classroom about ethnic practices.  Such reticence serves as a demonstration of a colonial hegemony in New Zealand that enforces alignment with a levelling of ethnic differences (Shields, Bishop and Mazawi 2005).  There are certain domains in mainstream New Zealand schools (like Matangi College, the pseudonymous label for the location of this research) in which ethnicity is celebrated, such as cultural groups and their shows.  However, as valuable as these activities are in terms of improved school experience and attendance for Maori and Pasifika students (Whitinui 2008), in many mainstream schools these moments are mostly restricted to the practice room or the auditorium and do not necessarily translate into the presence of ethnic practices or positions in the classroom unless robustly supported across the curriculum (Savage et al.  2011).  Admittedly, my field work observations were restricted to the school grounds and to this specific classroom, limiting my ability to confirm the pervasiveness of this observed classroom reticence of Pasifika students (indeed everyone) about ethnicity.  MASCULINITIES IN NEW ZEALAND As part of the broader study of language use in a sexuality education classroom, gender was of great relevance, and here masculinity will be the focus.  In the colonial history of New Zealand, hegemonic masculinity has been and largely continues to be one that comprises a Pakeha version that emphasises violence, stoicism, heterosexuality, and a rugged sports-oriented masculine world (Hokowhitu 2004.  Phillips 1987).  As Hokowhitu (2004) argues, in a normative sense Maori men have largely aligned to this version since colonisation, as evidenced by the spectacle of the Maori sportsman, although of course embodying it to varying degrees.  Referring to this phenomenon as Maori men’s ‘consumption of Pakeha masculinity’, Hokowhitu points out that in the face of the possible extinction of their people, many Maori men ‘were forced to assume those masculine qualities that would abet their integration into the dominant Pakeha culture’ (Hokowhitu 2004.  269).  This was a process of appropriation whereby Maori men gained a certain masculine legitimacy via terms approved by Pakeha masculinity.  as Malcolm MacLean (1999.  23) has expressed it, ‘Maori men can never be admitted to this legitimate masculine world on terms other than those determined by its cultural mores.  They can be admitted as rugby players and as soldiers. ’ It is important to note that there is evidence of other masculinities that proliferated in Maori culture historically, for example nineteenth century photos of Maori men that show them demonstrating mutual physical affection by lazing on each other in open displays of caring (Hokowhitu 2004).  However, since colonisation such versions of masculinity have been subordinated by a patriarchal masculinity that is primarily an historical, colonial construct (Hokowhitu 2008).  My intention here is not to deny or obfuscate the pre-colonial history of the Maori warrior, for example, and attempt to replace it with some kind of monolithic, essentialised and softer version.  rather, the point is to emphasise that for Maori men (and indeed Pakeha men), a narrower field of masculinities eventuated from the hegemonic processes of colonisation.  In contrast with the colonial New Zealand, rugged, masculine norm, modern Pasifika men in other Pacific Island locales have been observed performing masculinities more in line with the nineteenth century Maori photos described above.  In Hawaiʻi, Tengan (2002) has contrasted Hawaiian men’s masculinities (a softer, sexualised version associated with Hula) with the Maori sportsman, and indeed warrior, which is usually associated with the Haka, or war challenge, made famous globally by the All Blacks rugby team.  He suggests that the Maori version is seen by his Hawaiian men informants to represent an ideal masculine image to strive for (although this stance is contested by many Kanaka Maoli women, as he outlines).  Again, the point here is not to suggest that men from other Pasifika societies never embody and/ or perform masculinities that include the sportsman spectacle.  obviously they sometimes do so, just as there are Maori men who embody and/or perform subordinated masculinities within the New Zealand context.  In fact, there are numerous rugby stars who hail from Pasifika communities.  Rather, the point is that a different array of masculinities has been more readily accessible to them.  For instance, Tengan is careful to observe that Hawaiian men have historically found other ways to subvert the perceived emasculation of the colonised in Hawaiʻi.  An example of this subversion is highlighted in the work of Walker (2005, 2008) in which Waikıkı surfers are seen to use sexual/romantic allure to bolster anti-colonial agency.  Sexual prowess in Hawaiʻi represents a different masculinity from that of Maori-Pakeha masculinity, and it is therefore important to the current study, for the Cook Island, Niuean, and Samoan boys are seen to ignore the local normative version at key moments.  Of relevance here is the work of Alexeyeff in the Cook Islands (2008), which has revealed that local and Western concepts of sexuality and gender are markedly different and come together with friction.  Sexuality is not central to masculinity in the Cook Islands, and indeed Oceania more broadly.  Therefore, for example, men who prefer to have sex with akavaʻine (i. e.  cross-dressing ‘men’ who tend to exclusively desire straight men) are not considered to be gay (Alexeyeff 2009).  These men’s social identity is based on public behaviour, and private sexual activity (opposite sex or same sex) does not factor in the equation because it must be concealed both from public display and public declaration.  If they act like straight men in public life, then that is what they are considered to be and a blind eye is turned to any ‘contradictory’ sex habits.  The akavaʻine, too, are defined by their gendered roles in the community (i. e.  they are girls, as they claim) rather than being defined by who they privately prefer as sexual partners.  Because of the transnational kinship networks between the Cook Islands and New Zealand and North America, these contrasts with Western concepts of gay and transgender are quite salient to people in these communities, and the contrasts are humorously played with (Jolly 2008b).  This tendency to combine local and global in relation to sexuality and gender is similarly the norm amongst Samoan New Zealander men (Park et al.  2002).  The participants in the current study also step outside of a New Zealand colonial framing of gender and sexuality in a playful manner, making these Southern theorisations highly instructive for the analysis.  The following section outlines the approach taken during analysis and further sets the context by introducing the participants.  <Middle> DATA AND PARTICIPANTS.  Social context in sociolinguistics is crucial for understanding and explaining language use, for it influences the choices that we make between linguistic resources.  Culturally based practices form an important part of an array of components that comprise context, including also gender and sexuality.  Culture influences interaction at a macro level via norms and values while at a micro level analysis can focus on the linguistic ways in which speakers align themselves and others with certain aspects of identity such as masculinity (or do not).  These alignments emerge during interaction and are dynamically negotiated (Marra, King and Holmes 2014).  During the analysis in this study, I focus on how masculinity emerges locally through interaction and how it is contested or not.  Speaker choices have many potential meanings, including acting as indices of gender as part of self-positioning and the ascribed positioning of others.  Gender is most often not directly indexed by linguistic acts.  Rather, language first of all performs specific functions in interaction while indirectly indexing gendered social identities through ideological associations in which language is linked semiotically to certain social meanings (Ochs 1992).  My approach to analysis aligns with this idea that identities may be indirectly indexed, incorporating the notion that this can be achieved through various acts such as.  • overt labelling (i. e.  using social categories such as lesbian or straight to refer to self or other).  • implicature (i. e.  inferences and presuppositions that provide links to social identities).  • stance-taking (i. e.  linguistic marking of a speaker’s orientation to ongoing talk via evaluation and affect).  • styling (i. e.  the use of a specific repertoire such as hip-hop talk or even a specific language or dialect).  all of which provide semiotic links to social identities (Bucholtz and Hall 2005).  Talk about sexualised male bodies in the classroom under investigation acts as this type of index, with gendered meanings dependent on how the interlocutors speak about body parts and postures, relating them to gender and sexuality in multiple ways, as outlined here.  This research took place in a New Zealand secondary school that appears here under the pseudonym ‘Matangi College’, an urban school on the North Island.  The ethnographic portion of the research took place between February and August 2009, with the audio recordings concentrated in the final month of that period.  The participants also appear under pseudonyms (Table 1) and are all age fifteen to sixteen (see also King 2010, 2014a, 2014b).  All were born in New Zealand or came as infants.  The two other important participants in this lesson are their teacher, Mr J, and myself.  two adults whose influence on the students’ experience was extensive, as one might expect, and our roles have been outlined in King (2014a). 3 Mr J (a pseudonym) is originally from Australia and had previously taught Physical Education and Health in Australia and England.  At the time of data collection for this study, he had been living and teaching in New Zealand for about six years.  I am originally from Canada, but my mother was born and raised in New Zealand as a member of the European/Pakeha majority.  In terms of ethnicity, I self-identify in the New Zealand context as European but not Pakeha, as I was not born and raised in New Zealand.  This birthplace distinction is contested (see endnote 2), but one to which I align so as to emphasise my own migrant history.  I came to this research as a former teacher of the New Zealand secondary school system.  After arriving from Canada, I worked as a secondary school teacher from 1996 to 2000, first in a small town on the North Island and then in an urban school (not Matangi College).  In both of those schools there were large numbers of students who identified in some way as Maori and Pasifika (including Cook Island, Fijian, Niuean, Samoan, Tokelauan, and Tongan) and about half who identified as European/ Pakeha.  Although nine years had passed since my time as a teacher in the area, my former time there proved to be valuable in permitting me to relate to the students regardless of their ethnicities.  CLASSROOM PRACTICE AND SITUATED IDENTITIES.  In previous analyses of sexuality education classroom discourse I have chosen not to emphasise the ‘institutionality’ of classroom dialogue (e. g.  King 2014b), arguing that student experiences in the classroom very much interpenetrate with their experiences elsewhere in the world.  Thus, to draw a clear line at the classroom door could serve primarily to reify roles which might perhaps be having questionable or minimal effect on the ongoing gendering and sexualisation of discourse in a particular community of practice.  That is, simply because participants are speaking as students and teachers at certain times does not mean that they will have a different linguistic and discursive ‘toolbox’ to draw from during performances of gender and sexuality.  Then again, it must be acknowledged that such effects could indeed be significant at certain times.  Students are at least sometimes ‘doing being teachers [and students]’ (McHoul and Rapley 2002.  75) in a local enactment of institutional roles that have origins predating the formation of this community of practice.  This sense of doing, a practice-based view of roles and identities, captures what is meant by performance in this study.  I use the term in the sense that Coupland (2007) has called ‘mundane performance’ in contrast with the ‘high performance’ (e. g.  shows and pre-rehearsed speeches).  In mundane social identity performances, gender and other identities are ‘done’ again and again in everyday interaction by way of various stylised acts that reiterate past, successful gender performances around us (Butler 1999).  I align with Marra and Angouri (2011) in their stance that the taking up and performance of ‘roles’ is linked with group belonging and ‘identities’, and so an approach that integrates these two ideas is most productive in institutional contexts.  Performances do not suggest fabrication, which supposes a core self to be lied about.  rather, many of our stylistic acts are aimed more at our hopes concerning future selves than our current concepts of what we are (Eckert and McConnell-Ginet 2013).  It is through these stylistic acts that we might become what we hope to be, and these acts may be conscious or unconscious to a varying degree.  The participants are part of a classroom-based community of practice, defined as a group who have together developed shared, localised practices while jointly negotiating a response to the conditions in which they find themselves (Eckert and McConnell-Ginet 1999.  Holmes and Meyerhoff 1999.  Wenger 1998).  In other words, they have come together in the institutional setting of a school and through sustained interaction have worked out shared ways of doing and saying things.  This is a community of practice whose shared repertoire is grounded in a joint enterprise of two parts – participating in and shaping a unit of study in sexuality education while concurrently participating in social research.  I have elsewhere argued, on the basis of ethnographic observation and discourse analysis, that highly localised practices were emergent over several months and clearly resulted in the formation of a community of practice (King 2014a).  However, to say that they have come together to form a community of practice does not mean that no one was acquainted beforehand.  On the contrary, these students had been, and in many cases continued to be, joint members of other communities of practice both within the school and in the wider community and even transnationally between New Zealand and other places in Oceania (e. g.  Cook Islands and Samoa).  In fact, some of them have known each other since kindergarten while still others are members of the same extended family.  When these other networks become relevant, they will be explained as part of the analysis.  Ethnographic observations revealed that the Samoan and Cook Island students who participated in the discussions analysed here are indeed transnationals.  In one representative example, just after the two-week term break I observed Lito chatting with Codey and Luana about her recent trip to ‘Sa’ (i. e.  Samoa) and, in a separate conversation, Jay comparing notes with Ata and other Cook Island students about their anticipated trips to ‘Raro’ (i. e.  Rarotonga, the largest and most populous of the Cook Islands) in the upcoming school holiday break.  In both examples, there was a tacit assumption that all present would be making a trip like this sooner or later.  They are members of Cook Island and/or Samoan ‘transnational enclaves’ (Besnier 1997.  19), travelling there, hosted by family and often reciprocally hosting family members in New Zealand.  As mentioned in the previous section, during classroom conversations of gender and sexuality (recorded or not) students rarely spoke about lesson topics in direct relation to their self-identified and often transnational ethnicities (i. e.  rarely saying ‘As a Samoan’ or ‘In Samoa’).  One isolated exception was Lito who once brought up the topic of fa’afafine in Samoa (i. e.  boys who present as non-masculine, self-identify as girls, and may later eschew masculine adult roles – Schoeffel 2014.  Tcherkezoff 2014) as an example of a gender identity that did not conform to New Zealand norms of binary gender and sexuality.  Mr J encouraged her to say more about it, but she fell silent and did not mention it again.  Nonetheless, I will argue that certain responses during class activities are difficult to explain unless Oceanic epistemologies are employed, and this serves as an indirect clue to the perhaps ‘covert’ relevance of ethnicity in the interaction.  MASCULINITIES AND HETERONORMATIVITY IN CONVERSATION.  The data for this study have been selected from a lesson that took place near the beginning of a six-week sexuality unit.  The focus of this lesson produced opportunities to observe the students talking about sexual minorities because homoerotic advertising images were included in an activity centred on gender in the media.  The task that stimulated the conversations to be analysed was drawn from Tasker (2000), a resource that formed the foundation of the teacher’s sexuality unit.  The specific data extracts analysed here were selected because they are representative of patterns observed in the broader linguistic ethnographic study.  As identified in Holmes and King (2017), there was an ongoing pattern in the class in which alignments to performance expectations for the roles of teacher and student incorporated an alignment to non-heteronormative and non-heterosexist talk.  Unfortunately, space restrictions do not allow for those conversations to be analysed here, but suffice to say that Mr J persistently drew attention to ways of saying and doing that presumed everyone is heterosexual in order to be critical of that type of discourse.  The students did their best to attend to such transgressions, expressing in class activities that their aim was to be inclusive of sexualminorities in every way possible even if they did not always succeed.  However, as the following analysis reveals, at this early stage of the sexuality unit (i. e.  week three of an eight-week unit), practices did not always fully align with those intentions.  Extract 1, below, is a small-group discussion by a group of girls (Ata, Luana and Lito) during an activity in which small groups are asked to analyse print media advertisements, answering questions about how the images represent men and women.  The group is discussing the advertisements they have been given by the teacher, and in Extract 2 (further below) they present their ideas during a subsequent whole-class discussion.  The image is a black and white photo of five men wearing nothing but tight, white brief-style underpants.  They are leaning on one another in ways that are suggestive of intimacy.  The caption reads ‘Versace Intensive’. 4 After spending a few minutes looking at the images and responding with their first impressions, the small group begins to have a discussion.  For transcription conventions, see the Appendix.  In turn 5, Lito gives the first reaction to the photo, with a long, emphatic, drawn-out exclamation of ‘yuck’.  In the subsequent turn, after a ten second pause, Ata reorients to the question paper in front of them, reading aloud ‘What was your FIRST thought’.  Luana and Lito then begin to discuss their shock, with Luana adding an interjection of ‘FUCKING’ for emphasis (turn 7).  Then Lito in turn 10 states that the picture is ‘not normal’.  In this discussion, words like ‘normal’ and interjections such as ‘yuck’ begin to generate an oppositional stance in relation to the image.  This stance indirectly indexes (Ochs 1992) a hegemonic ideal of how masculine men are supposed to appear and act in the New Zealand context.  The section closes with a heteronormative statement by Luana (turn 18) in which she repeatedly questions the manliness of the models (‘they don’t look like real manly’), comparing them to little girls with atrophic male anatomy (i. e.  ‘little GIRLS with BALLS’) and with the presupposition that this is typical for gay men (i. e.  ‘they look GAY’).  In this way, they index a close connection between gender and sexuality that in turn indexes the New Zealand hegemonic norm.  Even though the class has agreed that heterosexist talk is out of place in this sexuality education classroom, during this exchange between friends at an early stage in the sexuality unit, there is evidence of an alignment with a dominant notion of masculinity in New Zealand and a tendency (for girls in particular) to police masculinity to fit that dominant notion.  This policing is related to participation in the local heterosexual market (more on this below).  In Extract 2, below, we see the group’s presentation of this advertisement during whole class discussion.  Luana holds up the advert for the class to see, but her attempt to align with Mr J’s guidance of the lesson is immediately overwhelmed by spontaneous talk from the rest of the class.  Extract 2.  Italicised, underlined, non-indented sections comprise a small group conversation taking place at the same time as the whole class discussion, which appears in normal non-underlined type, fully indented.  For other transcription conventions, see the Appendix.  There is a brief, rapid cacophony of outbursts from turns 6–27. 6 Interjections of disgust appear (e. g.  ‘ewwww’ in turns 21 and 25) and use of lexical items such as ‘fags’ that, combined with a prolonged vowel and a rising then falling tone, point to a stance that is negatively judgmental of ‘gayness’ (e. g.  Lito in turn 20.  ‘they LOOK like fa. . . . gs ’).  These features are juxtaposed with the paradoxical and interesting subject positions taken up by Josh, Jay, and Codey.  There are negative responses from their classmates and even these boys initially react negatively – Jay in turn 7.  ‘AWWWW WRONG ’ and Codey turn 22.  ‘they’re buggers man’ (buggers being a pejorative term historically used in a pan-British-Empire context to refer to men who have anal sex with other men).  Although all of these affective responses index gender and sexuality positionings that are hegemonic in the colonial New Zealand context, Jay in turn 10 suddenly positions himself and some of his friends in the room as substitutions for the men in the photo.  This move is aligned to by Josh in turn 12.  The apparent incongruity of these two reactions is observed by Olivia and Aroha, who lean close to their group’s desk microphone in turns 6, 8, 9, and 14 and provide a running commentary in which they highlight the potential homoeroticism of this positioning.  Aroha emphasises the eroticism of the advert by using the term ‘sexy’ (turn 8) and Olivia then deploys a high rising tone in turn 9 on ‘underwear’ and ‘touching each other’, creating the implicature that Jay is engaging in a performance of same-sex desire or perhaps gay identity.  Significantly, despite the amount of negativity towards the embodiment of the models being expressed in this discussion, Jay’s discursive placement of himself and his friends in that same image is subsequently neither withdrawn nor disavowed.  Rather, that positioning is permitted to stand.  Thus, in the public forum of the whole-class discussion, performances initially align to heteronormalisation as speakers ‘Other’ homosexuality and construct themselves as valid members of the localised heterosexual market and also police the behaviour of others (Eckert 2006.  see also Cameron 1997).  As a concept, the heterosexual market uses economic metaphors to refer to a collaboration amongst children and teenagers in a move towards the predominantly heterosexual social order of adolescence (Eckert 2006, 2011).  The market metaphor is appropriate because the making and unmaking of pairings between boys and girls is the beginning of seeing their cohort as structured around social value, and that social value is based on heterosexual attractiveness (Eckert 2011).  The heterosexual market is relevant for the current study because the Pasifika boys’ contributions appear to sit outside of those relations, at least sometimes, despite a clear stance by the girls in which they seem to police masculinity as part of this heterosexual social order.  What gets overlooked is the alternate reading of the image by Jay and the other Cook Island and Samoan boys.  It is a reading in which a very different relationship is suggested between masculinity and sexuality, and as fleeting as that position appears to be in terms of talking time, it is an excellent example of an ongoing trend in this community of practice.  As will be seen in Extract 3 below, it was common for Pasifika young men in this community of practice to behave in ways that both problematised hegemonic masculinity and at times aligned with it, something that the Pakeha and Maori boys in the class (and the girls for that matter) were not observed to do.  Because there is a limited amount of recorded data that demonstrates this problematisation, it would perhaps be unwise to make too many assumptions about gender fluidity and its relationship to ethnicity in this context.  It must also be acknowledged that, in the data presented in this article, it is mainly Pasifika girls who participate in talk that aligns very closely to that hegemonic version.  However, in the larger ethnographic field study there were numerous other interactions, many that took place while audio recorders were switched off, in which the gender balance was more even in this regard.  Therefore, although the girls’ role in this case is significant, once again caution is required in order to avoid attaching undue significance to these girls’ performances of heteronormative policing.  Further research can hopefully shed light on this apparent gender fluidity of transnational Pasifika boys in New Zealand, and the apparent lack of it amongst Pakeha and Maori boys, to explore whether these observed practices extend beyond this community of practice or whether there might be alternative explanations for them.  The activity that Extract 3 has been taken from was recorded a couple of weeks later and comprises an activity in which students had to ask one another questions that have stereotypically been asked only of sexual minorities.  The purpose is to turn heteronormativity on its head and provoke reflection about heterosexuality (Tasker 2000).  Heteronormativity as a concept refers to how sexuality has become entangled with binary gender, reproducing a narrow version of heterosexuality as normative and rendering its entanglements invisible as part of that normalisation process (Milani 2017.  Motschenbacher 2011).  This entanglement of heterosexuality and binary gender has been referred to by Butler (1993) as the ‘heterosexual matrix’.  In a variation of what is often referred to in New Zealand classrooms as the ‘carousel’ discussion method, half of the students remained stationary at desks (and beside an audio recorder – there were eight recorders in the room) while the other half rotated tables after every second question.  They went through the questions in sequence and did their best to answer them in interview style. 