An important topic in psycholinguistic research is the nature of sentence representations during language comprehension.  Information from several sources is used to yield an interpretation of a sentence.  Syntactic processing is usually considered an essential step, as the comprehender has to build a syntactic structure according to the morphosyntactic rules of a language.  Traditional theories assume that language processing is based on complete and detailed representations of the input.  In addition to syntactic algorithms, sentence comprehension may be driven by nonsyntactic constraints and simple processing heuristics.  The good-enough approach to language comprehension assumes that the comprehender has access to two processing routes.  a complete syntactic route and a heuristic route that utilizes word order and plausibility heuristics to produce sufﬁciently good representations of sentences (F.  Ferreira, 2003.  Ferreira, Bailey, & Ferraro, 2002).  While the comprehender uses a combination of syntactic algorithms and heuristics, he or she could bypass a full syntactic analysis when faced with complex or temporarily ambiguous structures.  Under the good-enough account of processing, the comprehender may settle for an interpretation of a temporarily ambiguous sentence based on heuristics rather than on elaborate syntactic algorithms.  The good-enough representation of a sentence may be incomplete and incompatible with the actual input, as supported by the misinterpretation of garden-path and passive sentences.  The syntactic algorithm and the heuristic parser may generate different representations of temporarily ambiguous sentences such as (1).  (1) The student praised by the principal received good grades.  The example sentence is temporarily ambiguous between a past-tense main clause and a passive reduced relative clause structure.  In neutral contexts, the pasttense main clause structure is typically the preferred interpretation, resulting in increased processing difﬁculty if the sentence is disambiguated toward the passive reduced relative analysis at the by-phrase (Altmann, 1998.  Frazier & Clifton, 1998.  MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994.  McRae, Spivey-Knowlton, & Tanenhaus, 1998.  Trueswell, 1996.  Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994).  The main clause/reduced relative clause ambiguity has also been shown to pose parsing difﬁculties for second language (L2) readers when the initial interpretation must be revised upon disambiguation (Yang & Shih, 2013).  According to the goodenough approach, sentence comprehension could be based on heuristics, such as assignment of an agent role to the ﬁrst noun phrase and plausibility of the initial noun phrase as agent.  The comprehender may not construct an elaborate syntactic representation for the difﬁcult sentence, as heuristics offer a faster route.  Compared to ﬁrst language (L1) processing, L2 processing may be even more reliant on lexical or word-order heuristics while computing shallow good-enough syntactic representations (Clahsen & Felser, 2006.  Felser, Roberts, Gross, & Marinis, 2003).  To clarify whether the comprehender constructs an abstract syntactic representation for a temporarily ambiguous sentence, the study utilized structural priming as a means to probe syntactic representations during sentence comprehension.  Structural priming is the tendency to repeat a structural pattern that has been previously encountered (Bock, 1986).  The paper used the term structural priming rather than syntactic priming because part of structural priming might result from nonsyntactic sources (e. g. , Bock, Loebell, & Morey, 1992).  Prior exposure to a particular syntactic structure facilitates subsequent processing of the same or a related structure.  For example, if people encounter a sentence with passive voice, they are more likely than normal to use passives in subsequent sentences.  Structural priming taps into syntactic representation, as at least part of the priming effect depends on the repetition of syntactic structure across sentences and cannot be fully accounted for by the repetition of lexical items (e. g. , Bock, 1989.  Pickering & Branigan, 1998) or thematic role order (e. g. , Bock & Loebell, 1990.  Pickering, Branigan, & McLean, 2002.  Salamoura & Williams, 2007).  The occurrence of structural priming suggests that a syntactic representation is constructed and shared across primes and targets.  A few studies have used structural priming to investigate sentence comprehension and production in a bilingual context (Bernolet, Hartsuiker, & Pickering, 2007.  Chen, Jia, Wang, Dunlap, & Shin, 2013.  Desmet & Declercq, 2006.  Hartsuiker, Pickering, & Veltkamp, 2004.  Kidd, Tennant, & Nitschke, 2015.  Loebell & Bock, 2003.  Salamoura & Williams, 2006, 2007.  Schoonbaert, Hartsuiker, & Pickering, 2007.  Shin & Christianson, 2009.  Weber & Indefrey, 2009).  These studies address the question of how bilinguals represent syntax in their two languages.  By examining cross-linguistic structural priming, inferences can be drawn about whether bilinguals have two separate syntactic systems or one integrated system with some information shared between the languages.  Cross-linguistic priming provides evidence for shared syntactic representations in bilinguals.  There are, however, limited studies on cross-linguistic priming in sentence comprehension, and the priming effects are complicated by the inﬂuences of word-order and lexical repetition between primes and targets.  Most comprehension studies investigate structural priming using temporarily ambiguous sentences, with the hypothesis that processing of a dispreferred structure would be easier than normal when target sentences are preceded by syntactically related primes.  Presumably, priming could enhance the availability of a dispreferred structure and thus reduce comprehension difﬁculty at disambiguation.  Under a lexicalist account of parsing, a primed syntactic representation is accessed via the lexical item that appears in both prime and target sentences.  In contrast, a nonlexicalist approach suggests that syntactic information is not bound to speciﬁc words and that activation of a structure can be lexically independent.  Thus, structural priming can occur in the absence of lexical overlap across sentences.  The small body of comprehension research has produced inconclusive evidence regarding the effects of lexical repetition on structural priming.  In many cases, comprehension priming appears to be lexically dependent and subject to a lexical boost (Tooley & Traxler, 2010).  Nevertheless, a few studies did ﬁnd verb-independent structural priming in comprehension (e. g. , Pickering, McLean, & Branigan, 2013.  Thothathiri & Snedeker, 2008.  Traxler, 2008).  Furthermore, while robust structural priming has been observed across languages with structures of the same word order, it remains unclear whether structures of different word order can prime each other.  Cross-linguistic differences in word order have raised the important question of how bilinguals represent similar structures that have different word order in their two languages.  Two models have been proposed based on different assumptions concerning whether people construct syntactic representations in one stage or two stages during sentence processing.  A two-stage account (e. g. , Bock & Levelt, 1994.  Garrett, 1980.  Hartsuiker, Kolk, & Huiskamp, 1999.  Hartsuiker & Westenberg, 2000) distinguishes functional and positional level of syntactic construction.  Functional-level processing selects lexical items to express conceptual content and then assigns grammatical functions (e. g. , subject or object) to constituents carrying thematic roles (e. g. , agent or patient).  Positional-level processing then imposes word order on the constituent structure through a linearization process.  In other words, syntactic representation includes a functional level of unordered constituent structure and a separate positional level of linear ordering.  Under this account, bilinguals have shared representations of equivalent structures in their two languages, regardless of word order.  In contrast, a one-stage account of syntactic construction (e. g. , Pickering et al. , 2002) maintains that both hierarchical and linear relations between constituents are computed simultaneously at a single level.  The positional information of constituent structures is encoded along with the functional level of syntactic representation.  From this viewpoint, structures that differ in word order across languages are represented separately (De Bot, 1992.  Ullman, 2001).  Bilingual research has yielded inconsistent ﬁndings supporting either a one-stage (e. g. , Bernolet et al. , 2007.  Kidd et al. , 2015.  Loebell & Bock, 2003.  Pickering et al. , 2002) or a two-stage (e. g. , Chen et al. , 2013.  Desmet & Declercq, 2006.  Shin & Christianson, 2009.  Weber & Indefrey, 2009) account of syntactic construction.  In an attempt to explain the interaction between lexical and syntactic processes during bilingual processing, Hartsuiker et al.  (2004) proposed an integrated model of representation (i. e. , shared lexicon and shared syntax), which is an extension of Pickering and Branigan’s (1998) lexicalist model.  Before we review the theoretical accounts in detail, it is important to note that Hartsuiker et al. ’s model is based on a limited number of studies on structural priming in bilingual production.  Hartsuiker and Pickering (2008) emphasized the need for more empirical data to inform the bilingual representation model.  The present study adopted Hartsuiker et al. ’s integrated model of representation, as it is speciﬁcally concerned with the interface between lexical access and structural building in bilingual processing.  Hartsuiker et al.  (2004) proposed that the lexicon and syntax are shared between the two languages of a bilingual.  More speciﬁcally, bilinguals have a single integrated lemma stratum that contains language-speciﬁc lemma nodes.  Each lemma node, which represents the base form of a word (e. g. , hit in English and golpear in Spanish), is linked to a speciﬁc language node (e. g. , English or Spanish), as well as to a shared conceptual node (e. g. , HIT [X, Y]), category node (e. g. , verb), and combinatorial nodes (e. g. , active or passive structure).  The experience with a passive structure will activate the passive combinatorial node as well as the verb lemma used in the structure.  The passive combinatorial node will remain active and thus will facilitate subsequent processing of a passive structure.  Structural priming also occurs across languages because the activated combinatorial node is linked to both languages.  Bilinguals can be primed to use a passive structure even if it appears in a different language.  This suggests that an integrated syntactic representation (as speciﬁed in a combinatorial node) is accessed during the processing of the same structure in the two languages.  Furthermore, encountering identical or translation-equivalent verbs across sentences will boost structural priming because additional activation will arise from the link between a verb lemma and a combinatorial node.  Nevertheless, Hartsuiker et al. ’s model does not specify whether grammatical function and word-order information are differentiated for combinatorial nodes, as their model was proposed based on priming between Spanish and English passives with an identical word order.  As mentioned above, controversy exists as to whether grammatical encoding occurs in one stage (a single level of syntactic representations with word order as an integral part) or two stages (two separate levels of functional and positional representations).  In the following section, we discuss lexical and word-order effects on crosslinguistic structural priming during sentence comprehension, which could inform a model of bilingual representation.  Then, we describe the experiment and draw predictions about cross-linguistic structural priming based on Hartsuiker et al. ’s (2004) model.  Previous studies indicated that structural priming affected online comprehension of ambiguous sentences, such as those involving reduced relative/main clause, double object/prepositional object, or early/late closure ambiguity.  These studies also suggested that priming effects were enhanced with identical verbs in prime and target sentences.  Eye-tracking and self-paced reading data showed that total reading times on the disambiguating region (i. e. , the by-phrase) were reduced when targets and primes shared verbs but not when they contained synonymous or different verbs (Tooley, Traxler, & Swaab, 2009.  Traxler & Tooley, 2008.  Traxler, Tooley, & Pickering, 2014).  Likewise, Arai, van Gompel, and Scheepers (2007) and Carminati, van Gompel, Scheepers, and Arai (2008) claimed that structural priming in dative structure required verb repetition.  The eye-movement data revealed that after listening to a double-object prime, participants were anticipating a recipient immediately following the verb as in a double-object dative structure.  The priming effect was only present with verb overlap between prime and target.  Traxler (2015) found facilitated processing of an early closure sentence after reading an early closure prime with a repeated verb.  In addition, Melinger and Dobel (2005) demonstrated that a single verb presented in isolation was sufﬁcient to prime a particular syntactic frame.  Dutch and German native speakers were more likely to reuse the primed dative structure after being exposed to nonalternating ditransitive verbs that were restricted to either prepositional or double-object dative construction, for example, contribute only used in prepositional datives and ﬁne only in double-object datives.  The authors concluded that a verb’s argument structure is lexically encoded and can be used immediately to resolve syntactic ambiguity during sentence processing.  The ﬁndings of verb-speciﬁc structural priming effects have led to the proposal that sentence comprehension is guided by lexically dependent syntactic information, which can be accessed during word retrieval (Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999.  Pickering & Branigan, 1998.  Roelofs, 1992).  On this view, prior exposure to a verb in a particular syntactic context strengthens the connection between the verb and the relevant syntactic structure.  Thus, when the same verb is repeated in subsequent sentences, the associated structure would be primed and become more readily available than normal.  According to Hartsuiker et al.  (2004), encountering a repeated verb across sentences will activate both the same verb node and the combinational node that encodes the verb’s subcategorization frame.  If different verbs are used across sentences, only the shared combinational node will be activated, thus resulting in weaker priming effects.  The lexicalist account of comprehension priming is challenged by another line of evidence suggesting that structural priming is not driven by speciﬁc verbs.  Instead, the tendency to repeat syntactic structure involves the preservation of abstract syntactic conﬁgurations that are not associated with lexical items (Bock & Grifﬁn, 2000).  Prior exposure to a particular structure leads to the activation of a speciﬁc mapping between syntactic constituents and thematic roles.  The processing system then tends to compute the same message-to-syntax mapping subsequently.  Unlike Arai et al.  (2007), Thothathiri and Snedeker (2008) found comprehension priming in dative structures without verb overlap between primes and targets.  In order to boost the priming effect, two primes were presented before a target, and a between-participant design was adopted, in which participants were only exposed to either prepositional dative primes or double-object primes to avoid interference from competing structures.  The authors argued that structural priming in comprehension might be relatively weak and needed to be boosted by repeated priming.  In addition, Pickering et al.  (2013) and Traxler (2008) reported verbindependent structural priming during the interpretation of prepositional phrases that involved high/low attachment ambiguity (e. g. , The waitress is prodding the clown with the umbrella. ) and modiﬁer/goal ambiguity (e. g. , The girl dropped the blanket on the ﬂoor in the basket earlier today. ), respectively.  Participants tended to adopt the same structural analysis as that in prime sentences, and the tendency persisted over intervening trials.  The ﬁndings in Thothathiri and Snedeker (2008), Pickering et al.  (2013), and Traxler (2008) implied that the inconsistency of priming effects in comprehension might in part be due to different sentence constructions or priming manipulations.  While priming results of some structures (e. g. , reduced relatives) suggest that comprehension priming might be determined by lexical repetition, results for other kinds of sentences (e. g. , those containing dative or prepositional structures) are mixed.  Furthermore, unlike in language production, readers have to integrate a variety of available information incrementally during comprehension.  In other words, previous experience with a particular structure is not the only information that would guide syntactic analysis.  A comprehension priming effect might be cancelled out by opposing constraints (e. g. , frequency and complexity) that favor an alternative structure.  The presence of multiple primes could enhance priming, making it a stronger cue in subsequent processing.  The current study extended the investigation into cross-linguistic priming using the same experimental manipulation as in Thothathiri and Snedeker (2008).  The focus was on priming of an English reduced relative structure, which had been found dependent on verb overlap between primes and targets.  As the source of structural priming in sentence comprehension gives rise to different theoretical explanations regarding language processing and representation, further evaluation of lexical effects on structural persistence is necessary.  Little research has been conducted on whether and how a lexical boost inﬂuences cross-linguistic structural priming during sentence interpretation.  Such research is needed in order to better understand the representation of lexical–syntactic information in bilingual memory.  WORD-ORDER EFFECTS ON CROSS-LINGUISTIC STRUCTURAL PRIMING DURING COMPREHENSION.  Experimental evidence for the impact of word order on comprehension priming is scarce.  Cross-linguistic priming studies have mostly focused on sentence production.  As the ﬁrst demonstration of abstract cross-linguistic priming in comprehension, Kidd et al.  (2015) pointed out that word-order equivalence supported the construction of integrated syntactic representations in bilinguals.  English object relative clauses (RCs.  e. g. , the woman that the man kisses) primed the corresponding interpretation of a German subject/object RC ambiguity (e. g. , die Frau, die das M¨adchen k¨usst “the woman[Subj/Obj] that the girl[Subj/Obj] kisses”), but English subject RC primes (e. g. , the woman that kisses the man) did not have such an effect.  The word order (i. e. , noun–noun–verb) is the same between English and German object RCs, but not between subject RCs.  The ﬁnding is congruent with those from production studies.  Using a picture description task, Bernolet et al.  (2007) reported no priming between Dutch and English RCs that differed in verb position (e. g. , de baby die rood is “the baby that red is”), though priming did occur from Dutch to German that both had verb-ﬁnal RCs.  The authors claimed that structures of different word order were represented separately.  Moreover, Loebell and Bock (2003) found structural priming between English and German datives that had the same word order.  Prepositional datives (e. g. , Der Junge schickte einen Brief an seinen Brieffreund.  “The boy sent a letter to his pen pal. ”) and double-object datives (e. g. , Der Junge schickte seinem Brieffreund einen Brief.  “The boy sent his pen pal a letter. ”) each primed the corresponding structure across languages.  In contrast, no priming was observed between English and German passives, where word order differed with the main verb appearing in a sentence-ﬁnal position in German.  However, it is unclear if the absence of priming was due to word-order difference between English and German, as Loebell and Bock’s experiment revealed no signiﬁcant within-German priming effect for passives either.  While the ﬁnding of word order dependent priming has been taken as evidence for a one-level account of syntactic representation, some studies have demonstrated that word-order equivalence is not necessary for cross-linguistic structural priming.  This suggested that syntactic processing might involve two stages and that there is a common representation across languages regardless of word order.  Weber and Indefrey (2009) showed L1 (German) to L2 (English) comprehension priming during word-by-word reading of sentences containing a passive structure.  Reading times were shorter for primed targets compared to the unprimed ones even if word order differed in German and English passives.  Yet, the cross-linguistic priming in Weber and Indefrey was obtained under the condition where primes and targets had translation-equivalent verbs.  Thus, it remains unclear whether the priming effect was lexically driven.  In addition, a few production studies provided evidence for cross-linguistic structural priming without word-order equivalence.  Chen et al.  (2013) found production-to-production and comprehension-to-production priming between Chinese and English passive sentences that differed in word order.  Shin and Christianson (2009) demonstrated that Korean postpositional datives (subject– object–verb) elicited more production of English prepositional datives (subject– verb–object.  e. g. , Mary-ka John-eykey chayk-ul cwu-ess-ta “Mary-NOM John-to book-ACC gave-PAST-DECL”).  Desmet and Declercq (2006) showed that RC attachments were primed from Dutch to English despite different word order.  Participants were more likely to attach the RC in an ambiguous English sentence (e. g. , The farmer fed the calves of the cow that were .  .  .  ) to the ﬁrst noun phrase following a Dutch high-attachment prime than following a lowattachment prime.  These ﬁndings can be best accounted for by a two-stage model of syntactic processing, where bilinguals have a shared representation for similar syntactic constructions in their two languages, regardless of wordThe literature review summarizes research on lexical and word-order effects on structural priming.  While production studies reported cross-linguistic structural priming without lexical and word-order equivalence, much less has been known about the nature of syntactic representations during sentence comprehension.  The present study investigated whether comprehension priming would occur from Chinese to English, two typologically unrelated languages, in the absence of lexical and word-order equivalence and whether the priming effect would be affected by a lexical boost.  Cross-linguistic priming in comprehension is potentially informative about the extent to which bilinguals make use of abstract integrated syntactic knowledge to interpret sentences.  <Middle> THE EXPERIMENT.  The present study tested Hartsuiker et al. ’s (2004) shared-syntax account through cross-linguistic structural priming.  A self-paced reading paradigm was utilized to investigate the inﬂuence of previous reading experience on bilinguals’ comprehension of ambiguous sentences.  The main question was whether Chinese (L1) passive RCs could prime the corresponding analysis of subsequent English (L2) sentences that were temporarily ambiguous between a past-tense main clause and a passive reduced RC structure (dispreferred).  Word order and lexical equivalence across Chinese primes and English targets were manipulated in this experiment.  The manipulation allowed us to determine whether structural priming would occur without word-order and lexical repetition and whether there would be a lexical boost.  Cross-linguistic priming without word-order and lexical repetition would provide evidence for shared abstract representations of syntactic structures underlying bilingual comprehension.  This also helped to clarify whether the comprehender constructed an abstract syntactic representation for syntactically ambiguous sentences in his or her L2 (cf.  Clahsen & Felser, 2006a.  Felser et al. , 2003.  F.  Ferreira, 2003.  Ferreira et al. , 2002).  Both Chinese primes and English targets contained a passive RC structure that differed in word order.  As illustrated in the head-ﬁnal Chinese NP (bei NP1 V de NP2) in (2) below, the head noun phrase (NP2) xu´esh¯eng “student” is modiﬁed by the preceding RC that contains a passive construction bei NP V (b`ei xi`aozhˇang ch¯engz`an “PASSIVE principal praise”).  The English equivalent (NP2 Ven by NP1) has an initial head noun phrase (NP2) student modiﬁed by the following passive reduced RC Ven by NP (praised by the principal).  Chinese and English passive RC structures have the same constituents that occur in different orders.  (2) n`ag`e b`ei xi`aozhˇang ch¯engz`an de xu´esh¯eng d´ed`ao hˇao ch´engj`ı the PASSIVE principal praise RC student receive good grade The student praised by the principal received good grades.  Except for the word-order difference, Chinese and English passive RC structures are identical with respect to functional relations between constituents.  They involve the same mapping between grammatical and thematic roles.  In both structures, the extracted subject noun xu´esh¯eng “student” receives a role of patient.  the internal noun xi`aozhˇang “principal” is the object of the preposition bei “by” and bears an agent role.  The experiment included three conditions.  prime with verb repetition, prime without verb repetition, and no prime.  To examine lexical effects on structural priming, Chinese primes and English targets contained translation-equivalent verbs in the prime with verb repetition condition but not in the prime without verb repetition condition.  The question of whether comprehension priming occurs independently of lexical items is relevant to the debate regarding whether syntactic representations are lexically speciﬁc.  If Chinese passive RCs prime the corresponding analysis of the ambiguous English sentences that contain different verbs, then the priming effect cannot be attributed to lexical activation alone.  Instead, the priming should arise from shared syntactic components at the functional level of representation.  Furthermore, the comparison of the two prime conditions would reveal whether verb overlap enhances structural priming in comprehension.  According to Hartsuiker et al.  (2004), the magnitude of cross-linguistic priming depends on both a syntactic component and a lexical component of representations.  Their model predicts structural priming from Chinese to English with and without translation-equivalent verbs across sentences.  When Chinese primes and English targets do not contain translation-equivalent verbs, structural priming arises from residual activation of the combinatorial node (in this case, the passive relative structure).  When English targets do contain translation-equivalent verbs as Chinese primes, structural priming results from residual activation of the combinatorial and the lemma node as well as the link between the two nodes.  In short, lexical repetition between primes and targets would boost structural priming.  It is worth noting that Chinese-to-English priming with translation-equivalent verbs is predicted to be weaker than within-language priming with identical verbs, as translation-equivalent verbs do not share the same lemma nodes.  If structural priming occurs from Chinese to English with and without translation-equivalent verbs, processing difﬁculty of the dispreferred English reduced relative structure should decrease.  This would provide evidence for a shared representation across languages, which could be lexically independent. 