1.  FOREWORD.  Aiming at analyzing the effects of the internationalization of universities, a joint research team from Universidad Autonoma de Madrid (UAM) and Hong Kong University (HKU) studied the socialization process experienced by a group of Chinese and Spanish students enrolled in mobility programs.  Since exchange students must show ﬂuency in both relational and academic discourses (which includes the ability to move through institutional and social spaces with ease.  Blommaert 2013), we tried to identify which practices international students deploy in order to enter the alien environment.  To do so, we traced a group of exchange undergraduates and analyzed their interactional practices at institutional and non-institutional spaces.  The socialization networks in which students take part are suitable sites for analyzing the negotiation of ideologies and subjectivities, and for exploring the relationship between stancetaking and recent forms of cosmopolitanism.  This is why, in this paper, we address such networks in our analysis of a communicative event situated on the fringe of a focus group (a research technique) and an informal gathering (naturally situated interaction).  Over a dinner party organized to inaugurate the research project in Madrid, the participants (two local researchers, five Chinese students and two local students, one originally from Taiwan) share meanings, recall semiotic resources to interpret the meaning of elements of sociocultural life, jointly construct intersubjectivities and negotiate their social identities within interaction (Jaworski and Thurlow 2009).  However, shared enactments of stance require complex strategies that go beyond the customary understanding of stance negotiation (cf.  Jaffe 2009 for an overview of sociolinguistic research on stance).  In this respect, our paper aims at making two contributions.  On the one hand, within sociolinguistic theory, it explores the extent to which sociocultural and ideological factors underlie stance alignment and the collective construction of identities (intersubjectivity being the link between both threads).  On the other hand, concerning cosmopolitanism, we advance a more nuanced approach to the notion based on positioning.  Cosmopolitanism remains an elusive concept, both in its definition and in its various kinds.  The subjects in our study position themselves as cosmopolitans, but not in ways that distinctly reflect an ‘ability to stand outside of having one’s life written and scripted by any one community’ (Vertovec and Cohen 2002.  4).  Rather, their cosmopolitanism points to a globalization of tastes resulting from increasingly multicultural societies and widespread capitalism (Calhoun 2002).  However, in spite of sharing a cosmopolitan orientation, significant ideological contradictions emerged during the interaction, and negotiation was required to overcome the misalignments.  The analysis of these tensions shows the extent to which all the elements involved in the stancetaking process (evaluation, positioning, and the definition and framing of the object of stance) are shaped by social values and ideologies.  In order to present our contributions, the paper is organized as follows.  After this introduction, the theoretical frame is presented in section 2.  The communicative event is described in section 3.  Section 4 analyzes two case studies (one on bullfighting, another on shopping trips to European capitals) excerpted from the transcription of the video-recorded event (see the Appendix for transcription conventions).  A rounding-up discussion of cosmopolitanism is presented in section 5, and the main conclusions are summarized in section 6.  2.  DIALOGICAL POSITIONING.  FROM SITUATEDNESS TO IDEOLOGIES We follow a fine-grained discourse analytic approach (drawing from the fields of the ethnography of communication, the micro-ethnography of social interaction and sociolinguistic ethnography) that highlights the role of local complexities in interactional activities.  Often, supposedly stable social processes are projected onto discourse as background facts (Blommaert and Bulcaen 2000.  Rampton 2001).  Such an aprioristic approach conceals how participants, in particular situations, enact language patterns in unexpected, creative and heterodox ways (Gumperz 1982.  Roberts, Davies and Jupp 1992.  Rampton 2001).  At the same time, we think that ideologies and social processes (such as cosmopolitanism, the internationalization of universities or consumption patterns in global societies) should be part of the analysis, since interactions shape and are shaped by other social practices and processes across space and time (Heller 2006, 2011.  Rampton 2006).  Stancetaking implies an evaluative, affective and cognitive act to which participants react.  For this reason, our study of dialogical positioning addresses the interplay between intersubjectivity and interactional stances.  However, our study of stance is not restricted to the situated interactional level, but moves onto the ideological domain of constructed values.  During the collaborative process of successive stance realignments upon which the construction of intersubjectivities rests, the sociocultural values and beliefs deployed by the participants have a most significant impact.  As presented by Du Bois (2007), the stance alignment process rests upon a coincident evaluation and positioning with regard to a given object (Figure 1), and both the mediating framework of linguistic structures and the values invoked by participants are crucial factors.  To our mind, however, the successive reframing of the object itself is also crucial, since it allows the emergence of new stances upon which alignment can happen.  In Du Bois’s approach (2007.  141), ‘sociocultural value is mobilized and deployed through stance processes.  Via specific acts of stancetaking, value can be focused and directed at a precise target, as locally relevant values are activated to frame the significance of participant actions’.  Also (2007.  173), ‘stance always invokes, explicitly or implicitly, presupposed systems of sociocultural value, while at the same time contributing to the enactment and reproduction of those systems’.  Our proposal places much more emphasis on sociocultural values and ideologies for a number of reasons.  to begin with, stances are interactional moves in which face (Goffman 1967) is negotiated, and face is rooted in sociocultural values.  These values, as we will see, shape the positioning of interlocutors and the co-construction of intersubjectivities.  Secondly, stances are also moves in which the expression of values and beliefs can trigger misunderstandings, particularly if the participants were first socialized in significantly different settings and conditions.  Finally, sociocultural values and ideologies are evoked to reframe and redefine the object of stance, which is therefore not a static and automatically shared entity, but an object of collision.  In fact, as discussed below, repeated enactments of stance ingrain particular subject positions layered into particular ideologies (Jaffe 2009.  Jaworski and Thurlow 2009).  Along these lines, the pages that follow address a series of research questions.  1.  To what extent do convergence and divergence depend on the accretive co-construction of the stance object.  What role do sociocultural values and ideologies play in such a reframing of the object, and how does it allow for repositioning and alignment.  Which role do interactional moves (such as contextualization in interactional inferential processes and accretion) play in stance alignment within multicultural dialogical interactions.  These questions, in relation to interactional stancetaking, are addressed in section 4. 1.  2.  What communicative practices foster the interactional construction of a cosmopolitan-oriented identity among young mobile citizens.  What kinds of cosmopolitanism do they exhibit.  What (local and/or transnational) cultural experiences and ideologies are they based on.  These questions, in relation to cosmopolitanism, are addressed in section 4. 2.  <Middle> 3.  AN INFORMAL DINNER AS A SETTING FOR INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION.  Once the Chinese exchange students (registered in language and communication classes taught in Spanish and/or English by the local researchers) had volunteered to take part in the project, an informal launching gathering took place at the home of one of the researchers.  Despite the difficulties of being a lecturer, a participant and an analyst at the same time, our multi-faceted position was particularly valuable, as it allowed tracing the students’ everyday life at the university with both participant and non-participant observation for an extended period.  The five exchange students taking part in the event included three women (student 1, aged 20.  student 2, aged 20.  and student 3, aged 19) and two men (student 4, aged 20.  and student 5, aged 21).  They came from small cities in northern and southern China, but studied elsewhere.  four had been taking Spanish for three years at the International Studies University of Beijing.  another one at the Sun Yat-Sen University in Guangdong.  In all cases, their first language was Mandarin (one also spoke Cantonese) and all of them had studied English for years (student 3 was schooled at a private bilingual school).  While in Madrid, the two men (students 4 and 5) shared a flat with a Spanish student of Chinese (with whom student 4 had become friends in Beijing when the Spanish student was on exchange).  among the females, students 1 and 2 also shared a flat.  student 3 lived at the UAM hall of residence, where she only spoke Spanish.  The rest spoke Chinese at home, although all of them were friends with Spanish and international classmates, with whom they socialized a lot.  Among them, the exchange students used WeChat to text one another in Chinese, but used WhatsApp to communicate in Spanish with their UAM classmates.  Their Spanish was good (a B2 level upon arrival in Madrid) and they achieved top grades while at UAM.  This is not surprising if considering that, in China, they had entered university through a very competitive process which only allows one student per province, and that their home universities selected them for the exchange program because of their excellent academic records.  Of the destinations available for a semester abroad, the decisive factor for choosing Spain rather than Latin America was security, and the reason for choosing UAM was its location in a capital city.  Our students make for an affluent set.  although none had ever been in an exchange program before, all of them (except student 4) had travelled abroad as tourists in Asia (Korea, Japan, Singapore).  Their friends and family had commissioned them to bring luxury brands as presents from the (many) trips they took while in Europe.  They always had lunch on campus even if the class timetable allowed them to go home.  They all thought Madrid was a safe, friendly and inexpensive place and, having anticipated rejection, they were surprised at the welcome they received from their Spanish classmates.  While other Chinese friends and classmates initially identified as potential participants for the study finally chose not to take part, the core group remained committed to the project and their overall impression of their stay abroad was very positive.  In addition to the exchange students, a female Taiwanese PhD candidate in linguistics at UAM, also the deputy director of a travel agency specializing in luxury Chinese tourism in Spain living in Madrid for over 10 years and with Spanish nationality, attended the gathering.  Also present was a male Spanish undergraduate atUAMrecently returned froman exchange in France,who audiovideo recorded the event and eventually ended up playing a significant role in it.  The local researchers, both female, were there too.  They have a long record of academic experiences abroad, in Europe and in the U. S. , and one experiences interculturality at home.  They both lecture on communication in intercultural settings and often involve students in their research.  At the meeting, they overtly displayed their positioning regarding a number of controversial topics (such as bullfighting or Franco’s dictatorship).  This, which is common practice in Spain (a country fraught with political and ideological strife, particularly at the time of the gathering, with the economic crisis at its peak) was the source of struggle.  In communicative events, participants extract a range of salient biographical information about co-participants that will impact into their stance interpretation, in addition to what the speaker is saying (Du Bois 2007.  155).  On this occasion, there was virtually no previous acquaintance among most of the participants, so the negotiation of meaning proved challenging, and a considerable amount of contextualization was required for reaching alignment.  The communicative event, convivial and easy-going, lasted for two and a half hours and can be divided into two parts.  the dinner, buffet-style around a table.  and after dinner, when the participants sat in sofas and armchairs and chatted about various aspects of the exchange program and about life in Spain and China.  The recorded material was transcribed in full and translated into English.  the fragments in standard modern Chinese were also transcribed and translated (see the Appendix for transcription conventions).  4.  STANCETAKING IN INTERCULTURAL CONTEXTS.  NEGOTIATING COSMOPOLITANISM.  4. 1 Struggling with national identities.  The controversial condition of being a Spaniard The gathering starts with a buffet-style dinner where everyone stands around the table and tastes different dishes.  This is the first time the participants meet outside the university context, some have never met before, and all of them have to renegotiate their relationships.  The analysis of the first fragment (4. 33 minutes altogether) allows us to delve deeper into the role of the experience lived by the exchange students and how they intersubjectively position themselves with regard to local values.  The selection takes place during the first half hour of the meeting, once everyone has been introduced to each other and the ice has been broken.  At one point (turn 4), the convivial ambiance is unexpectedly disturbed.  The fragment deals with a culturally salient activity, bullfighting, which is both a touristy must-have and the source of bitter confrontation among Spaniards.  While increasingly large numbers of Spanish citizens demand the end of bullfighting, many tourists still attend a show.  reproducing what Hannerz (1996.  103) calls a genuine form of cosmopolitanism.  ‘an orientation, a willingness to engage with the Other.  It entails an intellectual and esthetic openness toward divergent cultural experiences, a search for contrasts rather than uniformity.  To become acquainted with more cultures is to turn into an aficionado’.  This is why negotiating stances in relation to bullfighting becomes a significant concern for the Chinese exchange students, as it affects their enactment of cosmopolitanism.  The fragment begins with the local student and researcher 1 coconstructing the question of whether the exchange students have been taken on excursions outside Madrid.  Students 4 and 1 advance the same answer at about the same time.  a university-based student organization seeking to facilitate the integration of exchange students took them to Toledo, a sightseeing city.  At this point, the nonverbal aspects of the interaction available from the video become salient.  As researcher 1 says, ‘Have you (pl) gone to the bullfights. ’ (turn 4) her voice becomes louder, her eyes widen as she looks directly at student 4 and leans slightly in his direction.  Her eyebrows rise and the phrase ends in a marked intonation, slightly up and then down.  Hearing ‘Toledo’ as ‘bullfight’ comes from the phonetic resemblance of ‘torero’ (bullfighter) with a possible equivalence of ‘r’ and ‘l’ in Chinese followed by a softened second ‘r’ phoneme.  The combination of gaze, body posture, volume and intonation suggests an evaluative reaction to the notion that the exchange students have attended a bullfight.  Du Bois (2007.  143) understands evaluation as the process whereby a stancetaker orients to an object of stance and characterizes it as having some specific quality or value.  Here, researcher 1 is taking an evaluative stance on attending bullfights, and although the nature of the evaluation is not entirely clear, the final downward intonation suggests negativity.  Students 4 and 1 (turns 5 and 7) both repeat ‘Toledo’ in slightly louder voices, making clear that their pronunciation of ‘l’ was intentional.  Researcher 1 repeats ‘AH, TOLE. DO’ to confirm that she now understands the reference was to a city, not bullfights, and specifies her previous response with ‘I understood bullfight’, in a softer tone.  Physically, she leans back and gazes away from the students, smiling.  The trouble, however, has just begun.  Students 1 and 4 overlap researcher 1’s response invoking bullfights to say that they have actually attended one.  Her response (‘that TOO. ’ in turn 11) is louder and ends in an upward intonation.  Her eyes widen, she looks directly at student 1, shakes her head briefly, then gazes off camera in the direction of researcher 2 and the Spanish student.  The gaze shift, combined with the headshake and pause that follows it, suggest disbelief.  The whole set of turns in this interaction shows how all the participants dispute the floor to either confirm some have actually attended a bullfight or to express incredulity about it.  The dispute inaugurates a long-lasting stance accretion process by means of which the gradual accumulation of repeatedly taken stances in the run of conversation ends up making for reinforced, enduring positionings and identity structures (Du Bois 2002.  Rauniomaa 2003).  In this respect, observe how researcher 1 positions herself.  ‘I’ve never been to a bullfight.  Never, never, never, nor .  .  . ’ (turn 16), somehow forcing the object of stance, which could have gone back to sightseeing but remains at bullfighting.  The subjective dimension is overtly indexed by discrete linguistic elements (i. e.  personal pronouns and a reiterated negation) that reveal the subject’s feelings and positions her along a scale of affective value.  These linguistic elements are also contextualization cues (cf.  Gumperz 1982, for a theory of interactional inferential processing).  the emphatic use of the first-person pronoun in a null subject language, which presupposes a contrast between her and those who attend bullfights.  and the repetition of ‘never’, which contributes to the management of information.  With both resources, researcher 1 is helping her interlocutors interpret what the object of her stance is, and what the nature of the stance she is taking is.  Student 4’s laugh, as an interactional answer, may suggest hesitation and stress.  In turn 19, researcher 2 aligns with researcher 1’s stance.  ‘I will never go, I mean, I haven’t gone and I’m not going to go’.  Once again, the personal pronoun marks a contrast with those who do.  also again, the reinforcement of ‘no’ with ‘never’ act as contextualization cues with regard to the general interactional framework (Martın Rojo and Meeuwis 1993).  In choosing these cues, researcher 2 restricts the field of application and emphasizes the lack of alignment.  In adopting this stance, she entails a positioning with which researcher 1 aligns, although she tries to mitigate the interactional consequences of the stance misalignment and its impact on face-work (Goffman 1967).  Here we see intersubjectivity in action, when the subjective stances of two participants coincide within a dialogic exchange and, at the same time, collide with the positioning of others.  Researcher 1’s reiteration of her questions (‘but did you go. ’) and other markers such as intonation, which point to incredulity, act as cues to indicate to the interlocutor that these are not genuine questions, but illocutionary acts expressing rejection.  This explains why student 1 feels it is necessary to justify herself (Fragment 1. 2, turn 24).  Fragment 1. 2 starts with ‘but’, which shows student 1 has clearly detected the cues and has interpreted the researchers’ stances as a disagreeing negative evaluation, so she provides a counterargument.  ‘but since at the beginning we wanted to see what are the Spanish culture like’ (turn 24).  Her justification is also an attempt to reframe the object of stance.  As Jaworski and Thurlow (2009) and Thurlow and Jaworski (2011) note, willingness to engage with local people and culture is a form of ‘cosmopolitanism’.  This explains why student 1 reframes attending bullfights as a ‘cultural activity’, and generalizes it to the whole group (‘we’).  The shift allows detecting two significant phenomena.  First, that the object of stance in interactions is not necessarily static and shared, as suggested by Du Bois, but reframed and redefined by successive alignments and misalignments.  Secondly, that sociocultural and ideological elements are part of the process of reframing and redefining the object of stance (which goes beyond Du Bois’ acknowledgement of the role of sociocultural elements in the evaluation taken by participants).  The willingness to become involved with the other as a form of cosmopolitanism, and the concern with achieving competence at a foreign culture also relate to considerations of the self (Hannerz 1996).  In this respect, observe how (in turn 24) student 1 is also contributing to building face, both hers and that of the group, by presenting their attendance at a bullfight as a sign of the interest to be expected from an international student willing to become part of the host culture.  Their trip to the bulls is therefore an attempt to approach the other (and also, as discussed in section 5, a form of ‘consumerist cosmopolitanism’).  The enunciation, however, opens a new dimension of the controversy.  what the exchange students understand as ‘Spanish culture’ clashes with the opinion of the locals, who do not regard bullfighting as any form of culture (‘torture is neither art nor culture’ is a popular motto in Spain).  We observe how, by means of relating bullfighting and cultural traditions, the object of stance is gradually shifting while the participants co-build their subjectivities.  In this fragment, the mediating role of the Taiwanese PhD student stands out (turns 36 and 39).  Recall she was at one point an exchange student, but has now been living in Madrid for years.  Her stance aligns with that of the locals, but she admits that, like the international students, she did once go to a bullfight.  With her evaluative stance, she shows how rejecting a local cultural event does not threaten the image of the host interlocutors.  This opens the door for students 1 and 4 to state their displeasure regarding certain aspects of the bullfight.  From this moment on, the movements of all the interlocutors (which now also include students 5 and 2) bring stances closer.  researcher 1 recognizes an interesting folklore aspect in bullfighting (turn 41) and researcher 2 (turn 43) recognizes it may have a deeper anthropological value (although she ends up saying, ‘but I’m not interested’).  Both moves point towards an alignment regarding bullfighting, now reframed as a cultural good.  However, students 1 and 4 make a new move in the construction of face (turns 44 and 46), and find a new space for the co-construction of intersubjectivity which is ideological in nature.  These students start a narrative that describes the savage nature of the show and take a stance over which there is widespread agreement.  the fight is a bloody and unfair practice.  Later on in the conversation, subtle degrees of affection (‘it’s not fair’) and agreement (‘I agree’) would align stances.  As participants gradually converge after a conflictive process of accretive stancetaking, affective stance gradually became more explicit (‘I don’t like it’, ‘I dislike it’).  The connection between stance alignment and intersubjectivity also comes to the fore.  However, the movement also seems to announce a new reframing of the stance object.  From this moment on, the divergence there was with regard to the object of the stance, whether attending bullfights is worthwhile or a practice to be avoided, a cultural event or a brutal tradition, has gradually converged around the shared condemnation of violence.  Regarding the latter there is alignment, as displayed in the fragment that follows.  In this excerpt, several accretive evaluative stances point to less bloody variants of bullfighting, a preferred alternative for all the participants.  Having arrived at a point of agreement following the previous misalignment, all participants co-build their subjectivity as people who reject animal abuse, an ideological position they all share.  The national issue reappears in this fragment, in both cases evoked by researcher 1, who first refers to a neighboring country that keeps the tradition without sacrificing the bull, then to an underlying issue.  the controversial declaration of bullfighting as ‘the national fiesta’, a category it was included in during Franco’s rule.  Her sarcastic comment (turn 56) shifts the stance object once more, reframing it within the political arena.  The association of the ‘fiesta’ not with Spanish culture but with politics and, more specifically, with the Francoist definition of the Spanish identity and the one-sided use of some traditions would appear again later on in the conversation.  At that time, researcher 1 recalled the recurrent broadcasting of bullfights at prime time when she was a child, and the Spanish student stressed the fabricated nature of the fiesta.  Thus, what had started as small talk ended up reflecting the controversies that exist between different value systems, and helped redefine bullfighting not as cultural good, but as a political issue.  The evocation of the ‘fiesta nacional’, an expression coined during Franco’s regime, is a very effective resource for reframing the stance object and reorganizing the alignment process.  In the dialogic construction of intersubjectivity, the local participants want to remove themselves from elements considered from abroad (among some Spaniards too) a salient part of Spanish culture, in spite of the decadence of a tradition which has already been banned in some parts of the country.  In doing so, they question its essentiality and bring the international students closer to a more complex reality.  there is still a division between the so-called ‘two Spains’.  As Jaworski and Thurlow (2009) point out, stances (particularly if they are accretively constructed) are unavoidably sites of ideological constructions and contestation.  The bullfight episode closes with the alignment of all the participants, who jointly manage to create an intersubjectivity removed from the national boundaries the debate started with.  With regard to the questions we posed for this section, we already have some answers.  Throughout the negotiation to fix the shifting object of stance, and through successive convergences and divergences over the value system they relate to, intersubjectivity emerges as individuals within a group who condemn violent traditional practices.  Within the construction of the stance object and the stance alignment process, three factors have proven crucial.  contextualization, inferencing and stance accretion.  The outcomes of such a complex procedure are significant.  not only intersubjectivity has been built.  the participants have also co-constructed their social identities.  Having reached this point, the conversation changes topic and moves onto football.  Just beforehand, laughter suggests an alignment has been reached and the face of all the participants has been saved.  All in all, the foregoing section has shown1.  stance objects are negotiated and gradually co-constructed within interaction in a shared attempt to build a working consensus.  2.  sociocultural values and ideologies shape face-work.  and 3.  intersubjectivity is the link joining both strands.  Through this negotiation of stance towards bullfighting, the Chinese students may be able to position themselves as more sophisticated cosmopolitan subjects, who do not simply view local cultural traditions as exotic, but show sensitivity to values shared with local people, such as the humane treatment of animals.  4. 2 From local to cosmopolitan.  The distinction of being a citizen of the world.  Once dinner was over, the participants started an after-dinner chat, now sitting down.  The conversation kicks off with a question from researcher 2 about the exchange students’ plans for the Christmas break.  This particular fragment (Fragment 2. 1) starts with spatial and temporal deixis pointing at the mobility scenario and the opportunities that the location provides.  ‘And now that you are here, you’ll take the chance to go to other countries’ (turn 57).  The referent ‘here’ is both Spain and the city of Madrid, to which they refer on several occasions as a place from which is it easy to get to other European capitals.  The turn initiates a conversation in which the stances taken by the participants can be understood as reflections of different ways of being cosmopolitan.  Their value systems, however, are different, which triggers misalignments between some for whom luxury shopping is endowed with a romantic allure and others with a more pragmatic orientation, who favor budget deals.  At this point, the cultural premises that contextualize the object of stance are sometimes problematic once again.  The fragments (4. 50 minutes altogether) show how the interpretation of the stance object is not always shared.  Thus, during their dialogue, interlocutors have to agree on what the object of stance is, and to modify the value system that frames the stance object.  Fragment 2. 1 comes 45 minutes later than Fragment 1. 3 and starts with researcher 2’s suggestion of taking advantage of the location for traveling.  Three exchange students respond affirmatively to researcher 2’s question.  their plans include visiting other European cities.  The aim of such trips is quickly specified.  ‘to shop, to shop’ (turn 59).  As student 1 mentions shopping twice in rapid succession, student 4 confirms the point (‘yes yes yes’), after which student 1 expands on the statement.  shopping over Christmas will happen not just in Paris, but also in Italy.  Her laughter and the burst of unintelligible overlapping talk that follows highlight the emphasis placed on shopping as the reason for travelling abroad.  Later on in the evening, student 5 would comment on the cultural interest of Italy, but at this point nothing but shopping is mentioned.  Although no explicit evaluation is produced by the local participants, the Spanish student starts his turn with a counter argumentative marker (‘but’) and a request for confirmation (turn 62).  Researcher 2’s subsequent utterance suggests that shopping could happen in Madrid as well, which is implicitly a negative evaluation of the stance object, i. e.  shopping trips.  She responds to students 1 and 4’s stance, comparing price reductions in Madrid with prices elsewhere.  Although the full statement is unintelligible, both researcher 2 and the local student seem to be suggesting that the exchange students might find better prices in Madrid (in fact, the full transcript reveals that researcher 2 had unsuccessfully tried to introduce the point three times already).  The sales imaginary (turn 83) evoked by the researcher, focused on budgeting, clearly contrasts with the glamorous imaginary the students have in mind.  luxury shopping in Paris and Milan, as we will soon discover.  Hence, there is a conflictive misalignment regarding shopping and what shopping means.  To understand the alignment dynamics, we need to explore contextualization in further detail, tracing salient indexical meanings and identifying those aspects of context that participants must know to gather a successful interpretation of stances.  To do so, we pay particular attention to how the contextualization move of the Taiwanese PhD candidate (the only participant familiar with both sociocultural contexts) creates the necessary common ground.  Her move (turn 63) provides information that contributes to the contextual definition of the object in relation to which stance is being taken, i. e.  luxury brands.  Hence, in helping reframe the stance object, she is paving the way for alignment.  In further conversation, the exchange students would complete the contextual information highlighting the obstacles to finding luxury brands in China at even less affordable prices, and explaining how their families had specifically asked for these products as travel presents.  The foregoing fragment has shown our participants taking a different stance in relation to the object (i. e.  shopping abroad as an opportunity for purchasing luxury items versus shopping abroad as seeking cheaper deals).  Despite the differences, both stances can be seen as different ways of being cosmopolitan, in that both groups profess their knowledge and experience of traveling to different places in the world.  Thus, the fragment reveals the complex relation between consumption and cosmopolitanism (a more detailed discussion is presented in section 5).  The reference to the (very hard to obtain) visa needed for the Chinese exchange students to go to Britain shows cosmopolitanism is still a mode of social stratification.  Likewise, the fact that relatives put in orders for branded items shows that, for these students, mobility is also a means of gaining access to social distinction (Bourdieu 1984).  The fact that both groups display cosmopolitan-oriented stances allows addressing another research question, namely, the extent to which the enactment of cosmopolitanism depends on encounters with interlocutors who themselves exhibit cosmopolitan features.  In this regard, the romantic imaginary put forward in Fragment 2. 2 forms the basis for going beyond the initial lack of alignment about shopping.  In turn 84, researcher 2 restates her original question in the form of an affirmative statement, and a negotiation ensues among the participants in an attempt to align stances.  During the process, the mediating role of the Taiwanese PhD student stands out once again.  In turn 86, the PhD student provides information she considers local participants must bear in mind in order to contextually ground and understand their co-positioning.  In doing so, she is introducing sociocultural differences between Asia and Europe and displaying ethnic identities.  The use of the deictic ‘there’ builds an implicit opposition between ‘there’ and ‘here’, reframing the interaction in cultural terms.  In choosing to mediate this way, she is assuming the participants do not have enough information about each other to make sense of differences.  Once France and Italy have been targeted as the desired destinations for the holidays, the Taiwanese student makes the premise behind such travelling explicit.  ‘there in Asia it seems like a dream’.  Researcher 2’s alignment (turn 87), an endorsement of the stance of the exchange students, draws laughter and incomprehensible comments.  Her cleft sentence emphasizes the lack of differences (‘to me’ [stance subject], ‘too’ [position]) and neutralizes the PhD student’s polarization, thus bringing the subjective positions into alignment.  Laughter eliminates the tension of previous moves, and researcher 1 (turn 89) immediately adheres to the newly emerged alignment.  This is not constructed on the grounds of shopping, nor on the idea of it being an impossible dream (unlikely within a setting in which the destination is already geographically close and travelling already a reality for these students), but rather on the romance attached to the destinations.  The common acknowledgement of France and Italy as romantic places reveals the presence of a shared object of stance, and that the participants share sociocultural values too.  The statement of the Spanish student in turn 91 (‘but later on you will’), aimed at the only person who disagrees, levels all the participants.  The shared imaginary is clearly a sign of distinction for all of them.  Nothing to do with the practical logic of low-cost flights avoiding and high prices implicit in researcher 2’s recommendation which led to the former misalignment (a logic from which, for the sake of alignment, she distances herself in turn 94, which elicits laughter as a welcoming response).  The alignment on the romantic nature of transnational mobility marks a departure from the consumerist dimension of cosmopolitanism.  In fact, besides the ‘consumption’ of foreign places, both exchange students and locals come up as global connoisseurs who perform cosmopolitan practices in their interaction.  Overall, the foregoing section has shown.  1.  the relevance of common ground for understanding stances and reaching points of interactional alignment.  2.  the impact of ideologies in the alignment process.  and 3.  how some current forms of cosmopolitanism (e. g.  the consumption of romantic places) tend to trigger alignment much more expediently than others (e. g.  the consumption of luxury goods).  5.  COSMOPOLITANISM REVISITED FROM THE VIEWPOINT OF STANCETAKING.  So far, we have observed the enactment of cosmopolitanism in interaction.  The orientation of our participants towards different cultures and locations constitute interactional-level manifestations of cosmopolitanism, and the analysis of the fragments reveals the many tendencies and strands that coexist within cosmopolitanism.  The participants in our study might be seen as exemplars of today’s cosmopolitanism.  They can be said to be cosmopolitans in that they manage to make their way into other settings and successfully renegotiate meanings.  However, we cannot assess the extent to which they are indeed developing a symbolic personal repertoire (along the lines of the cosmopolitan competence suggested by Hannerz 2004.  Vertovec and Rogers 1998).  This is why, although they present themselves as such, our participants cannot be unmistakably called cosmopolitans nor the opposite.  Nonetheless, they do seem to enact some of the main trends detected in the literature in relation to current forms of cosmopolitanism.  The bullfighting case study reveals how international students act as tourists (albeit with an academic slant) and, although they dip into the national culture of the host community, they remain rooted in their own culture at the point of origin.  this is why mediators are needed to ‘get the point’.  We therefore acknowledge the presence of a form of ‘touristy’ cosmopolitanism that includes the search for varied experiences and a delight in understanding contrasts between societies rather than a longing for uniformity or superiority, as well as the development of some skills at interpreting cultural meanings (Vertovec and Cohen 2002).  However, as Hannerz (1996.  103) notices, cosmopolitans do not accept particular elements of the alien culture and refuse others.  they do not negotiate with the other culture, but rather accept it as a package deal.  And this is precisely where tensions emerge.  Locals, even if oriented towards cosmopolitanism, cannot embrace culture as a package, because they are committed to it and need to face and act against the cultural elements they reject.  This tendency to see the experience of cultural diversity as a value in itself is linked to Urry’s (1995) notion of ‘aesthetic cosmopolitanism’, by means of which not only elites, but also tourists (and, in this case, international students) have developed more cosmopolitan or far-reaching aesthetic tastes.  The consumption of foreign places seems to be based on exoticism, on commodification and on a consumerist culture (for a revision of the notion of commodification, cf.  Pujolar 2017).  However, engaging with locals and negotiation stances, international students face the contradictions raised by superficial cultural immersions, and they develop cultural competence in the stricter sense of the term.  The analysis of the fragments on shopping reveals another significant trend in relation to current forms of cosmopolitanism.  Although the excerpt does not allow discerning if the reason behind Paris and Milan-based shopping goes beyond the actual purchase of goods, it clearly points to a distinction-seeking identity-building practice.  I got it in Paris.  Following Jaworski and Thurlow (2009.  196), we observe how a form of elitism is enacted by.  making a claim to exclusivity, superiority, and/or distinctiveness on the grounds of status, knowledge, authenticity, taste, erudition, experience, insight, wealth, or any other quality warranting the speaker/author to take a higher moral, aesthetic, intellectual, material, or any other form of standing in relation to another subject (individual or group).  In this respect, places are significant.  As the analysis reveals, specific cultural practices and commodities offer a means of self-definition that removes subjects from a restrictive local context.  Also indisputably, it reveals that cosmopolitanism is linked to transnational mobility and distinction.  To be sure, there is cultural capital in saying ‘I amoff to Paris nextweek’, just asmuch capital as in the actual Chanel scarf eventually bought there.  Would the same scarf carry less value if bought during a January sale inMadrid.  Probably not.  it is not the object itself that lends distinction to contemporary cosmopolitans, but having bought it at the right place, just as having had a picture taken at whatever iconic spot (Thurlow and Jaworski 2011).  Participants in this interaction were socialized in particular consumption patterns at one place but currently they are relocated, again as customers, in another one (Hannerz 1996.  153).  As a result, they have access to commodities, such as luxury brand names, that have a significant part of their value derived fromtheir original (and not peripheral) location/locus of production.  Thus, the analysis of the shopping case study seems to refer to what Calhoun (2002) describes as ‘consumerist cosmopolitanism’, manifested in the globalization of tastes (such as the massive transfer of foodstuff, artworks, music, literature and fashion), which represents the multiculturalization of society, and also the advanced globalization of capitalism.  As Calhoun notes, cosmopolitanism still refers to ‘the class consciousness of frequent travellers’. 