A central assumption of most models of reading acquisition is that children start out by decoding words on a letter-by-letter basis at ﬁrst (Ehri, 1995.  Grainger & Ziegler, 2011.  Seymour, 2005.  Share, 1995).  They learn grapheme–phoneme correspondence (GPC) mappings and sound out words.  As their reading skills develop and they gain more experience with written words, it is assumed that they become sensitive to intermediate-sized units until they are ﬁnally able to decode whole words directly “on sight. ” For example, Seymour’s (2005) dual-foundation model proposes that reading develops in phases.  It is thought to begin with simple alphabetic decoding using phonemes and advances to increasingly more complex structures, ﬁrst centered around rimes, and in the last stage using syllables and morphemes.  Equally, the multiple-route model of orthographic processing (Grainger & Ziegler, 2011) assumes that beginning readers start out by decoding words on a phonology-driven letter-by-letter basis (cf.  Share, 1995) that leads them to two routes of orthographic processing.  a ﬁne-grained and a coarse-grained route.  The main difference between the ﬁne-grained and coarse-grained routes is the coding of letter positions.  the ﬁne-grained route is sensitive to ordered letter sequences, whereas letter coding in the coarse-grained route is position invariant.  As a consequence, the coarse-grained route entails direct access from orthography to semantics via whole words, whereas the ﬁne-grained route is tuned to detect frequently co-occurring letter sequences as functional units for word recognition.  Both syllables and morphemes feature frequently co-occurring letter sequences and can thus be suspected to function as sensible intermediate-sized units that are detected in the ﬁne-grained route.  Albeit being formally very similar in terms of size and features of letter position coding, syllables and morphemes differ from each other in how they are deﬁned and what type of information they encode.  Syllables are phonologically deﬁned and encode information about pronunciation.  Morphemes are deﬁned through the convergence of form and meaning, encoding lexical–semantic information.  Syllables can thus be seen as being more closely associated with a phonological processing route, while morphemes constitute a more direct link between orthography and semantics.  A very recent extension of the multiple-route model by H¨aiki¨o, Bertram, and Hy¨on¨a (2016) captures this relation by proposing a syllabic assembly mechanism as an intermediate stage between a phonological and a ﬁne-grained route, thus predicting the use of syllables to chronologically precede the use of morphemes in reading development.  In a range of languages, empirical evidence has been put forward separately for the use of syllables and morphemes in reading development.  Vast evidence shows that sensitivity to syllables, as a subdomain of phonological awareness, is a strong predictor for later reading ability (e. g. , Wagner & Torgesen, 1987), measured, for example, by syllable counting or syllable segmentation tasks.  In the process of reading, sensitivity to syllables has also been found early in children of different languages.  For example, French Grade 5 readers show effects of syllable frequency (Chetail & Mathey, 2008) and syllable compatibility effects, that is, faster responses when a word was preceded by the corresponding syllable, have been found in syllable detection tasks with Grade 1, 3 and 5 children (Col´e, Magnan, & Grainger, 1999.  Ma¨ıonchi-Pino, Magnan, & ´Ecalle, 2010) and in lexical decision tasks with sixth graders (Chetail & Mathey, 2012).  The visual segmentation of a word in a position congruent with a syllable boundary (pa/per vs.  p/aper) results in fewer word recognition errors for poor second-grade readers of English (Katz & Baldasare, 1983) and syllable-congruent coloring similarly speeds up poor second-grade readers of French, while it slows down good agematched peers (Chetail & Mathey, 2009).  Moreover, eye-tracking studies indicate that hyphenation at syllable boundaries is less disruptive than hyphenation within syllables for Finnish readers already by the end of ﬁrst grade (H¨aiki¨o, Hy¨on¨a, & Bertram, 2015).  This indicates that syllables are helpful units very early in reading acquisition and for dysﬂuent readers (see also Hautala, Aro, Eklund, Lerkkanen, & Lyytinen, 2012) and that in many languages syllables come into play very early in the course of reading acquisition.  There is also vast evidence that children use morphemes in word recognition.  In lexical decision and naming tasks in a variety of languages, elementary school children have been found to respond faster and more accurately to multimorphemic compared to matched monomorphemic words (Italian.  Marcolini, Traﬁcante, Zocolotti, & Burani, 2011.  French.  Col´e, Bouton, Leuwers, Casalis, & Sprenger-Charolles, 2011.  Qu´emart, Casalis, & Duncan, 2012.  English.  Carlisle & Stone, 2003, 2005).  Conversely, more false alarms and prolonged response times (RTs) in lexical decision were found in the presence of real morphemes in pseudowords, because they were mistaken as real words and thus harder to reject (Qu´emart et al. , 2012).  Those effects of morphology were found as early as in Grade 2 for French children, and a little later (around Grade 3) in Italian children.  Moreover, masked morphological priming effects for sufﬁxed words and nonwords have been reported for children in different languages from around Grade 3 onward (English.  Beyersmann, Castles, & Coltheart, 2012.  French.  Beyersmann, Grainger, Casalis, & Ziegler, 2015.  Casalis, Dusautoir, Col´e, & Ducrot, 2009.  Qu´emart, Casalis, & Col´e, 2011).  A Finnish eye-tracking study by H¨aiki¨o, Bertram, and Hy¨on¨a (2011) reports advantages from hyphenations in compounds only for slow second-grade readers, but not for their faster age-matched peers or Grades 4 and 6 readers.  Therefore, as for syllables, there is general consensus that children use morphemes as units at some point in reading development.  however, ﬁndings on when this happens diverge depending on the language studied.  It is important to note that only a few studies have more directly compared syllables and morphemes in reading (see Prinzmetal, Hoffman, & Vest, 1991, for a study with adults using an illusory conjunction paradigm).  However, in order to reﬁne models of reading acquisition, it is necessary to disentangle the relative importance of syllables and morphemes in word recognition and determine whether there is an order of their utilization in reading development.  One study that has addressed the direct comparison between syllables and morphemes in child reading was undertaken by Col´e et al.  (2011) with French second and third graders.  They used multimorphemic words in which the syllable and morpheme boundary do not coincide (e. g. , malade).  This is the case for multimorphemic words that have a sufﬁx beginning with a vowel.  The consonants at the end of the stem in these cases form a syllable unit with the sufﬁx, because syllable division follows the maximal onset principle (Spencer, 1996), which states that the maximally possible number of consonants should be assigned to the onset of a syllable rather than to the end of the preceding syllable.  Col´e et al.  (2011) exploited these cases to more directly compare the impact of syllabic segmentation (e. g. , ma lade), morphological segmentation (mal ade) and morphological + 1 grapheme (mala de) to unsegmented low-frequency derivations (malade) in a reading task.  Reading times were expected to be shorter if the segmentation is in line with the units that are activated in reading and longer when the segmentation destroys important units.  The authors found that both second and third graders read words equally fast when they were segmented by a space into syllables or morphemes or were unsegmented.  Readers were only slowed down by the morphological + 1 condition.  These results point to ﬂexible use of syllables, morphemes, and even whole words, at least for French Grade 2 and 3 readers in the reading of multimorphemic words.  Ziegler and Goswami (2005) emphasize in their psycholinguistic grain size theory that language-speciﬁc characteristics determine preferences for the use of certain units as linguistic characteristics of a language and its orthography may pose different demands on learners.  Cross-linguistic differences in reading development have been attributed to orthographic transparency (Katz & Frost, 1992), syllable structure (Seymour, Aro, & Erskine, 2003), and morphological richness (Perfetti & Harris, 2013).  Learners of opaque orthographies (e. g. , English) might need longer to master GPC-based reading, while in transparent orthographies, like German or Finnish, solid reading skills can be achieved quickly by the use of GPC rules only (Wimmer & Goswami, 1994).  As a consequence, learners of opaque orthographies can be assumed to proﬁt considerably more from using bigger units, such as syllables or morphemes, because those tend to have more consistency in the way they are spelled and pronounced (Katz & Frost, 1992).  However, languages also vary in the complexity of their syllable structure.  for example, in Finnish and French syllable structure tends to be more simple, while the syllable structure of German and English is rather complex (Seymour et al. , 2003).  As Seymour et al.  (2003) found, complex syllable structures tend to be more challenging for developing readers.  Moreover, as the transparency of an orthography tends to be correlated with the morphological complexity of the language (Perfetti & Harris, 2013.  Seidenberg, 2011), more transparent languages are often equipped with a richer and more productive morphology.  For languages in which morphemes are very prominent, like German or Finnish, then, they suggest themselves as units in word recognition, despite the availability of smaller units.  Considering the interplay of syllables and morphemes, languages also differ in the degree of convergence and interactions of the two units.  In German, syllables and morphemes very often coincide.  Moreover, sufﬁxation usually does not affect stress assignment in the word, whereas in French, sufﬁxes often draw the stress.  The distinction between syllables and morphemes might therefore be less pronounced in German in comparison to French.  Differences between languages in the structure of mappings between phonology, orthography, and meaning can produce differences in the sensitivity to certain sublexical units.  Due to the described characteristics, German presents an interesting contrast to the languages in which development of syllables and morphemes as reading units has been studied so far, and different predictions can be made on the basis of its linguistic characteristics.  In particular, the orthographic transparency together with complex syllable structure would predict prolonged reliance on graphemes throughout development.  However, the morphological richness should act in favor of early advancement to morphemes.  Finally, the prevalent convergence of morphemic units with syllabic units can be expected to also enhance reliance on syllables.  Consequently, the relative importance of syllables and morphemes in reading development is unclear for this language and needs to be tested empirically.  To address the role of syllables and morphemes as reading units in German reading development, we adopted the methodology from the study by Col´e et al.  (2011), using a manipulation of the presentation format.  Unfortunately, the study by Col´e et al.  (2011) focuses exclusively on multimorphemic words and does not reveal whether syllables are equally used in reading monomorphemic words.  It is possible that a segmentation at the syllable boundary in monomorphemic words leads to even faster responses as it does not simultaneously destroy a morphemic structure.  Therefore, we further extended the study design to monomorphemic words and made some slight changes to the paradigm.  We included multimorphemic words with a syllabic segmentation (e. g. , FAH. RER) and a morphological segmentation condition (FAHR. ER) in our study, just like Col´e et al.  (2011).  In order to examine the use of syllables in multimorphemic words in comparison to that in monomorphemic words, we also included monomorphemic words that were segmented at the same positions as the multimorphemic words, namely, at the syllable boundary (syllable-congruent.  e. g. , SPI. NAT) or one letter after the syllable boundary (syllable-incongruent.  SPIN. AT).  Note that the latter parallels the morphological segmentation condition of the multimorphemic words, but in the case of the monomorphemic words cannot coincide with a morpheme boundary by deﬁnition (–at is not a German sufﬁx).  We hypothesized that word recognition would be easiest for readers in the disruption condition that puts emphasis on the functional unit they actually use, while other disruption positions should make reading harder.  That is, if a reader uses only syllables as functional units, the syllable-congruent disruption condition should lead to faster word recognition compared to the incongruent disruption in both monomorphemic and multimorphemic words.  However, if a reader uses morphemes as functional units, the syllable-incongruent disruption of multimorphemic words (e. g. , FAHR. ER, thus being morpheme-congruent) should be faster than the syllable-congruent one, while this should not be the case for the monomorphemic words (SPIN. AT) as the resulting structure does neither map onto a phonological syllable nor onto a morpheme (but see Taft, 1979, 1986, for another possible structure called BOSS).  Our study thus not only allows investigating the ﬁndings of Col´e et al.  (2011) for another language but also reﬁnes them due to the inclusion of monomorphemicAnother limitation of the study by Col´e et al.  (2011) is that no pseudowords were included, although those can also be informative concerning the use of syllables and morphemes in reading new items.  Because children, especially those who have just started to read, are often confronted with a given written word for the ﬁrst time, the use of syllables or morphemes in reading such a newly encountered word is of special interest with regard to the role of different units in reading development.  Reading pseudowords most likely parallels the processes involved in reading new words.  In the present study, we included pseudowords by employing a lexical decision task.  Learners of transparent orthographies achieve basic reading skills with rather high accuracy rates very early in development (Seymour et al. , 2003.  Wimmer & Goswami, 1994), and silent reading, as required in the lexical decision task, is already natural to them.  Therefore, a lexical decision is an adequate task to study processing also in beginning readers of German.  The pseudowords included in the study matched the real words.  they either did or did not feature an existing sufﬁx (multimorphemic and monomorphemic pseudowords) and were also segmented syllable-congruent (e. g. , DOS. TOR, HEL. BER) or syllable-incongruent (DOST. OR, HELB. ER), the latter again corresponding to a morpheme-congruent disruption for pseudowords featuring a sufﬁx (–er).  Considering the hypotheses for pseudowords, one has to keep in mind that, opposite of words, those have to be rejected in a lexical decision task.  Syllable-congruent segmentation, encouraging the use of syllables, might help to “read through” the pseudoword faster than a segmentation that destroys this unit when readers rely on a phonological decoding strategy.  It might thus allow a faster rejection relative to a syllableincongruent segmentation, as evidence from English and Serbo-Croatian (Katz & Feldman, 1981.  Lima & Pollatsek, 1983) suggests.  However, multimorphemic pseudowords have been found to be harder to reject (Burani, Marcolini, & Stella, 2002.  Qu´emart et al. , 2012), because morphemes as lexical–semantic units signal word status.  Therefore, the syllable-incongruent segmentation of multimorphemic pseudowords (e. g. , HELB. ER), which puts emphasis on the real sufﬁx, might result in prolonged rejection times.  Overall, including both mulimorphemic and monomorphemic words and pseudowords in our study provides a more extensive direct comparison of syllables and morphemes as functional units in reading.  To summarize, one of our main aims was to ﬁnd out how the use of syllables and morphemes changes in the course of reading development in German.  In order to investigate developmental differences, children at different stages in reading development were examined.  Based on the previously mentioned ﬁndings on syllable and morpheme use in children, we decided to conduct the study with second and fourth graders.  In accordance with the prediction of the multiple route model (Grainger & Ziegler, 2011) that developing readers use a phonological strategy in the beginning, we expected that younger children would be more inclined to make use of syllables in word recognition, because although those are intermediate-sized units, they are phonologically deﬁned and thus more approximate to the phonological route (see H¨aiki¨o et al. , 2016).  Based on the developmental sequence outlined by H¨aiki¨o et al.  (2016), older children, who had gained more reading experience, were expected to have moved away further from a phonological strategy and more toward an orthographic strategy using ﬁne-grained processing with morphemes as functional units.  In order to compare the processing strategies of readers that are still in the course of development to those of skilled readers, we also included a group of adults.  The adults’ processing thus serves as a reference point for the reading skills that the children should be achieving at some point in the future.  Skilled readers should have access to both ﬁne-grained and coarse-grained processing.  Consequently, their reading strategy should depend on task demands.  As coarse-grained processing, that is position invariant, is more robust to small changes in words that only affect a single sign (i. e. , transposed or substituted letters.  e. g. , Forster, Davis, Schoknecht, & Carter, 1987.  O’Connor & Forster, 1981), this would be a more beneﬁcial strategy for the present task.  It is therefore plausible that adults are able to adjust to this, being considerably less affected by the position of the disruption.  <Middle>Participants.  Fifty-seven second-grade children were recruited from 10 elementary schools in the Berlin area.  At the time of testing, the children were at the beginning of second grade, meaning they had received approximately 1 year of formal reading instruction.  Permission for participation from the school administration and the children’s parents was acquired prior to the experiment.  Moreover, 20 fourth graders were recruited at the after-school care of one Berlin school.  Permission from the after-school care and the children’s parents was acquired before testing.  Every child received a small gift and candy for his or her participation.  Finally, 24 university students from the Berlin area participated for monetary reimbursement.  In order to ensure that participants showed age-appropriate reading behavior, each participant’s reading ﬂuency was assessed using the 1-min reading test for words and nonwords from the second edition of the Salzburg Reading and Spelling Test (Moll & Landerl, 2010).  We used reading ﬂuency percentile norm values of <3 as an indication that readers belonged to the 3% of the population at the lowest end of the reading ﬂuency scale suffering from dyslexia.  This applied to 6 second graders.  Furthermore, we excluded one adult who reported having a history of dyslexia and two adults who reported having learned German as a second language later in life.  As we aimed at investigating unimpaired reading, we excluded those participants.  As a consequence, the study included 51 second graders (24 girls, M age = 6. 9 years), 20 fourth graders (10 girls, M age = 9. 5 years), and 21 university students (10 women, M age = 26. 1 years).  All remaining participants reported normal or corrected to normal vision and had German as their native language or second language acquired before the age of 6.  As analyses for monolinguals and early bilinguals showed no differences, all children were included in the analyses.  Materials.  Twenty-four multimorphemic words, consisting of a stem and a sufﬁx, were selected from the childLex corpus (Schroeder, W¨urzner, Heister, Geyken, & Kliegl, 2015).  Crucially, sufﬁxes beginning with a vowel were chosen (–er, –in, –ung), because when they are combined with a stem, the syllable boundary does not correspond to the morpheme boundary, thus creating a special morphophonological case. 