In natural languages, sentences are often underspeciﬁed, sometimes conveying more than they encode lexically.  The overall meaning of a sentence typically consists of multiple layers of meaning.  While some are literally encoded, others are simply inferences that the hearer must derive by reasoning from the context.  Consider (1), which presents a noncanonical French word order known as a c’estcleft.  To many French native speakers (NSs), (1) not only presupposes that there is a person who ate a sandwich and asserts that this person is Jean but also conveys exhaustivity.  the clefted constituent is interpreted as if under the scope of an exclusive (e. g. , “only”.  see [2]).  Listeners are thus justiﬁed in deriving the intended meaning that Jean, and no other individual in the relevant contextual domain, ate a sandwich.  (1) C’est Jean qui a mang´e un sandwich.  “It’s John who ate a sandwich. ” (2) Seul Jean a mang´e un sandwich.  “Only John ate a sandwich. ” One important difference between (1) and (2) is that nonliteral meanings can be suspended or canceled (Levinson, 2000).  Adding information like “ .  .  .  and so did Paul” to (1) does not create an overt contradiction (as would be the case in [2]), but would instead simply signal disagreement or discontent.  Crucially, adding such information to (1) does not result in ungrammaticality.  Thus, clefts and exclusives behave differently with respect to the exhaustive effects they convey, suggesting that they do not possess identical underlying semantics. 1 Whereas “only” lexically encodes exhaustivity (i. e. , exhaustivity is part of the truth-conditional meaning), in cleft sentences exhaustivity is simply inferred, and has been argued to be pragmatically derived.  Consequently, and following Lambrecht (1994), we take clefts to be semantically equivalent to their canonical counterpart.  Theoretical work has examined how inferences arise and are processed in online comprehension (Bott & Noveck, 2004.  Levinson, 2000).  Other work has focused on how children acquire and process these aspects of meaning (especially with respect to scalar implicatures.  Chierchia, Crain, Guasti, Gualmini, & Meroni, 2001.  Noveck, 2001).  Less research exists on second language (L2) data.  For the French c’est-cleft, most previous studies have examined production and use (Donaldson, 2012.  Katz, 1997.  Reichle, 2008), and Dekydtspotter and Farmer (2016) recently examined effects of structural priming.  Yet, no L2 study to our knowledge has examined the exhaustive inference of c’est-clefts.  The ﬁrst contribution this paper makes is thus empirical.  it provides novel data on an aspect of French clefts that remains understudied in the L2 literature.  Using ofﬂine data, the main goal of this paper is to examine the following overarching question.  after acquiring the syntax of the c’est-cleft, at what point do L2 learners acquire the associated pragmatic inference of exhaustivity.  We rely on data from two control groups (English NSs and French NSs) as a baseline.  Because deriving the exhaustive inference involves both syntax and discourse pragmatics, examining the acquisition of this inference constitutes an appropriate testing ground for the interface hypothesis (IH.  Sorace 2011, 2012.  Sorace & Filiaci, 2006), which posits that syntax–discourse interface phenomena pose unique and potentially insurmountable difﬁculties in L2 acquisition.  Accordingly, the second contribution of this paper is theoretical, contributing to the debate on the L2 acquisition of interface properties.  BASIC PROPERTIES OF THE FRENCH C’EST-CLEFT.  The underlying syntax of the c’est-cleft has been widely debated. 2 Most scholars agree that the cleft is biclausal, containing a matrix clause followed by a relative-like clause, both of which share a common referent (Lambrecht, 1994).  Some accounts generate clefts via movement (Belletti, 2005.  Gross, 1968), whereas others argue for base-generation and adjunction (Clech-Darbon, Rebuschi, & Rialland, 1999.  Hamlaoui, 2007.  Reeve, 2010, offer a comprehensive review).  Functionally, clefts arise in focus contexts.  Following Lambrecht (1994, 2001), the cleft sentence in (1) functions as follows.  it presupposes the existence of an individual who satisﬁes the backgrounded predicate in the relative-like clause, and it marks this individual as the focus, that is, the part of the sentence that evokes a set of relevant alternatives, which assists the hearer in updating the common ground (Krifka, 2008.  Rooth, 1992).  This is represented in (3). 3 (3) Utterance.  It’s Jean who is eating a sandwich.  Presupposition.  X is eating a sandwich Focus.  Jean Assertion.  X = Jean While this analysis also holds for the English it-cleft, there are subtle, but crucial differences that distinguish it from the French c’est-cleft.  First, in terms of construction frequency, the French c’est-cleft is used much more commonly than its English counterpart (Bourns, 2014.  Carter-Thomas, 2009).  This is primarily due to constraints on French prosody.  whereas English can shift prosodic prominence to match the location of the focus constituent, French is more rigid, placing prosodic stress only at the right edge of an intonation phrase.  The c’est-cleft, despite adding syntactic complexity, circumvents this prosodic restriction by creating an extra intonation boundary that can align with the focus constituent (Hamlaoui, 2007.  Lambrecht, 1994).  Consequently, this construction is the default strategy used to mark the simpler focus known as information focus, instantiated in answers to whquestions, especially when the focused element is a subject (Destruel, 2013.  F´ery, 2013.  Hamlaoui, 2007.  Lambrecht, 1994.  Skopeteas & Fanselow, 2010).  Compared to the English it-cleft, which typically constitutes a marked construction (the use of which requires additional pragmatic justiﬁcation, signaling a stronger type of focus known as “identiﬁcational,” “contrastive,” or “corrective” as argued by Kiss, 1998), the French cleft is regularly present in the language, and therefore in the L2 input. 4 We elaborate on this point and its relation to L2 acquisition in the discussion section.  Second, in terms of discourse function, the c’est-cleft occurs in contexts where the it-cleft does not.  It is used for explicative all-focus in cases where the information in the relative clause is also part of the focus (i. e. , no content is presupposed.  all the information is new and unknown to the hearer).  All-focus follows a generic question (e. g. , “What happened. ”) or can arise out of the blue, as in (4).  (4) Question.  Qu’est-ce qu’il se passe. “What’s happening. ” C’est [Jean]F qui t’appelle.  “It’s Jean who is calling you. ” (Rowlett, 2007, p.  186) In addition, French has other constructions that, although resembling the c’estcleft on the surface, are not clefts per se in that they cannot be unclefted.  that is, they do not have canonical equivalents (for detailed discussion of different c’est-cleft sentences, see, for instance, Clech Darbon et al. , 1999.  De Cat, 2007.  Katz, 1997).  All in all, although similar structurally, English and French clefts differ in their function.  The variety of contexts in which the c’est-cleft can occur, compared to the it-cleft, makes for a potentially misleading input, which the L2 learners of French will have to overcome in order to express themselves felicitously.  Despite functional differences in marking focus, c’est- and it-clefts have been noted to convey an exhaustive inference such that the clefted element is interpreted as the only relevant referent in the contextual domain.  For example, hearing (5), a speaker justiﬁably infers (5c).  (5) C’est Martin qui a cuisin´e des lasagnes.  “It’s Martin who cooked the lasagna. ” a.  Assertion.  x is Martin.  b.  Presupposition.  There is an x such that P(x).  c.  Inference.  No one other than Martin cooked lasagna.  What is the nature of this inference.  Some research (see Kiss, 1998, for English.  Clech-Darbon et al. , 1999, for French) treats exhaustivity in clefts as a purely semantic phenomenon.  Under this view, exhaustivity is part of the truth conditions of the cleft sentence, and it arises whenever a cleft occurs.  A contrasting view, following Horn (1981), considers that the exhaustive inference is pragmatic, arising through context.  As a result, the inference is weaker than predicted by semantic approaches, and it can be canceled.  Following this approach, the cleft is semantically parallel to its canonical counterpart (Lambrecht, 2001, p.  467) but differs pragmatically by conveying a stronger exhaustive inference.  Recent experimental work has supported the pragmatic account and has challenged strict semantic accounts.  Onea and Beaver (2011) investigated preverbal focus in Hungarian to probe the nature of exhaustivity in clefts.  They compared the strength of the exhaustive inference derived by speakers in three sentence types.  clefts, those with an exclusive particle, and canonicals.  Exclusives and canonicals served as controls against which to measure the exhaustive inference in clefts.  exclusives semantically encode exhaustivity and therefore convey this meaning regardless of context.  In contrast, canonical sentences (at most) implicate exhaustivity, but do not require it.  the exhaustive inference in canonicals is thus much weaker (if present at all).  In designing their instrument, Onea and Beaver (2011) assumed, following Levinson (2000), that pragmatic inferences, unlike lexically encoded meanings, can be canceled without changing the truth-value of the sentence.  Knowing that speakers’ judgments of truth-value take into account real-world and contextual knowledge, Onea and Beaver designed their discourse-contextualized experimental task based on the following reasoning.  if speakers overtly disagree with a sentence, some kind of inherent incompatibility must exist between the truthvalue of the sentence and the situation in which it appears.  For example, because the exhaustivity of exclusives such as seulement (only) is lexical and thereby asserted (rather than inferred), it is not optional and cannot be canceled.  Thus, when viewing an exclusive sentence whose exhaustive reading is incompatible with the discourse context, speakers should express disagreement by overtly contradicting the assertion.  In contrast, because exhaustivity in canonicals is weak and not lexically asserted, speakers should react differently to canonicals whose truth-value (with respect to exhaustivity) differs from the discourse context.  Against this backdrop, Onea and Beaver (2011) designed an ofﬂine forcedchoice task in which participants viewed pictures that violated the exhaustive inference of the three sentence types described above (i. e. 