 Passive voice is among the most prominent and widespread perspectivechanging constructions in the world’s languages (Abraham & Leisiö, .  Givón, .  Keenan & Dryer, ).  The acquisition of passive forms by children has been the controversial topic of research studies across the last decades (Baldie, .  Messenger, Branigan & Mclean, ).  Passive constructions have been described as delayed in some languages (Gordon & Chafetz, .  Prat-Sala, Shillcock & Sorace, ), and as early acquisitions in others (Allen & Crago, .  Aschermann, Gulzow & Wendt, .  Demuth, Moloi & Machobane, ).  Syntactic, semantic, discourse, cognitive, and usage factors as well as elicitation conditions have been invoked in explaining why young children struggle in comprehending and producing passive forms (Brooks & Tomasello, .  Messenger, .  Pinker, Lebeaux & Frost, ).  The current study aimed to examine the acquisition of passive forms in Hebrew in a new light.  First, focus here is on the MORPHOLOGY of the passive verb.  As general theoretical motivation for this verb-focused investigation, we follow Haspelmath’s (, p.  ) comment that “the verbal morphology associated with a passive construction is an essential part of the construction whose properties are worthy of study in their own right.  Indeed, the passive can be regarded as first and foremost a verbal morphological category whose meaning implies certain changes in the clause structure. ” From a Hebrew-specific typological perspective, studying passive verb morphology in acquisition is key, as Hebrew passive forms are part and parcel of the verb-pattern binyan system, a set of seven conjugations which provide the vocalic form of the verb and its syntactico-semantic category.  Second, previous research on passive acquisition – in Hebrew as in other languages – examined spoken passive constructions in young children, mostly in preschoolers.  In contrast, the current study elicited passive forms in writing from school-going children and adolescents, compared with adults, during the period of Later Language Development (Berman, .  Nippold, ). 