INTRODUCTION.  Until 1997, the healthcare needs of Brazilian transsexual people received little to no attention from the public health system (Sistema Unico de Saude – SUS).  Indeed, one of their main healthcare concerns, i. e.  sex reassignment surgeries, was regarded as a crime of mutilation by the Federal Board of Medicine (FBM).  This changed, however, with the publication of FBM Resolution 1. 482/97, in which sex reassignment surgeries were allowed to be performed as an experimental ‘treatment’ to resolve transsexual individuals’ dissatisfaction with their morphological sex.  Since then, the regulation for Brazilian transspecific healthcare policies has undergone constant revision.  The most recent governmental documents regulating gender identity clinics in the country are the Ministry of Health Decree 2. 803/2013 and the FBM Resolution 1. 955/ 2010.  the former institutionalizes the Brazilian Transsexualizing Process (‘Processo Transexualizador’) within the SUS and allows the government to subsidize surgeries and hormone therapies.  the latter revises previous resolutions and more clearly defines the FBM’s viewpoints on transsexuality and its medical management.  According to the Brazilian documents, ‘the transsexual patient has a permanent psychological disorder and [because of this] rejects his/her phenotype and tends to self-mutilate and/or commit suicide’ (Brasil 2010).  Due to their pathologized status, transsexual people who wish to have their healthcare subsidized by the State must be diagnosed as suffering from a Gender Identity Disorder (GID) – a term coined by the American Psychiatric Association (APA) in the fourth version of its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). 2 Thus, it is a psychiatric diagnosis which guides Brazilian trans-specific healthcare policies and, as a consequence, informs the interactions between transsexual people at gender identity clinics and their doctors.  Interestingly, though, the Brazilian documents never mention the DSM as a diagnostic resource.  However, fieldwork in one of the Brazilian gender clinics has shown that it is the APA’s diagnostic criteria which guide doctors’ clinical gaze (Foucault 2001) when talking to a transsexual person.  In this scenario, the medical management of transsexual individuals at Brazilian public hospitals provides an analytical avenue for the sociolinguistic critique of a macro-sociological process the editors of this Special Issue allude to in their introduction, namely discursive colonization.  This concept refers to the ease and rapidity with which certain authoritative Western discursive frameworks and their respective texts circulate globally and end up imposing ex-centric (Bhabha 1994) institutional standards of textuality by which the global South must comply, obliterating, thus, local culture-specific discourses, practices and subjectivities.  In this context, the first aim of this paper is to critically assess the epistemological dynamics which make the global circulation of the APA manual possible.  The centrality of this diagnostic text is also relevant for our understanding of how interactions between doctors and transsexual people unfold, and, most significantly, how identity (de)legitimation is interactionally negotiated in these ex-centric, globalized terms.  In fact, the necessity of a psychiatric diagnosis within the APA’s terms imposes interactional tensions.  As argued by Teixeira (2013), for example, the GID diagnosis is the result of discursive strategies deployed by clinic users to convince doctors they fit the diagnostic criteria.  In this scenario, worried they will be denied access to the clinic services, transsexual clients rapidly learn ‘the necessary life-history required for successful “passing”’ (Hird 2002.  583).  Although the learning and the telling of an adequate narrative is frequently referred to in the literature which analyses the little resonance such diagnostic criteria have in transsexual people’s lives (Butler 2004.  Bento 2006.  Stone 2007 [1991].  Teixeira 2013), these analyses are largely based on secondhand, retrospective accounts of transsexual people about their experiences with doctors.  As such, little do we know of the interactional in situ instantiation of such ‘adequate narrative’, let alone the learning trajectory that leads to the narrative shape, content, and pragmatic effects.  Understanding the micro-interactional processes that lead to the materialization of such text-based, diagnostically driven, ex-centric narrative standards is the second aim of this paper.  Within language and gender studies, research on interactions between health professionals and transsexual people has been developed by Susan Speer (Speer 2009, 2010, 2011).  However, Speer’s allegiance to conversation analysis’s (CA) understanding of context as co-text (Billig 1999), and focus on what members explicitly orient to, impel her to take the status of transsexuality as a mental disorder for granted.  As such, her CA studies overlook the centrality of the diagnostic manuals to the relationships within the gender clinic she investigates.  Needless to say, transsexual clients will hardly ever admit to their doctors they are familiar with the diagnostic texts.  Physicians, in turn, will seldom tell their interlocutors they perceive the rehearsed quality of the narratives (Maryns 2006) of ‘true’ transsexuality and grow intensely suspicious of what the clients say.  This is testimony to the fact that the diagnostic texts may be regarded as an absent presence in these interactions.  indeed, they constitute a ‘ghost audience’ (Langellier 2001) which constrains the social actions of both transsexual people and their doctors.  In order to understand the role of these ex-centric diagnostic criteria in the relationships between health professionals and transsexual people, we must take into account the dynamics between what Goffman (1959) refers to as onstage and backstage performances.  In other words, we need to compare and contrast what happens in consultations (i. e.  their turn-by-turn interactional development) and the interlocutors’ attitudes and opinions about these interactions which are shared outside the consultation room.  The analytical enterprise, as Fabrıcio (2013.  146) puts it, is a task of ethnographically tracking down the textual webs that make visible ‘how social actors experience and reconstruct [their membership to social categories] in their everyday discursive practices’.  This kind of textual cartography involves looking into the macro-sociological dynamics which allow certain discourses to materialize as travelling texts (Blommaert 2005), i. e.  ones invested with the power and authority to circulate globally almost without contestation, and the effects of these itineraries in the micro-details of people’s daily institutional lives.  Having this in mind, the discussion in this paper is grounded in 13 months of ethnographic fieldwork at the Programa de Atenc~ao Integral a Saude Transexual (PAIST).  It investigates the intersubjective effects of the importation of the DSM diagnostic criteria, their standards of textuality, and narrative resources in the lives of transsexual people and their doctors.  During fieldwork, the PAIST had three main health professionals (a surgeon, a psychologist, and a psychiatrist) and two visiting physicians who were specializing in urological surgeries.  Here, specifically, I present a case study of one of the research participants’ first contacts with the PAIST to highlight the discursive processes that lead her to locally refashion her life history within the textual modes of the DSM.  As the analyses show, the necessity of such a narrative refashioning exemplifies the ex-centricity of such medical texts within the Brazilian context.  This will lead me to.  (1) discuss the intersubjective effects of such narrative refashioning on the clinic users’ situated relationships with their doctors.  and (2) reflect on the possibilities of a sociolinguistics from the South, i. e.  an approach to discourse and interaction that takes discursive colonization and its local effects seriously.  <Middle> TRAVELLING TEXTS AND EPISTEMOLOGICAL IMBALANCES.  A CRITIQUE FROM/ABOUT THE SOUTH.  The DSM-IVR is described as a ‘helpful guide to medical practice’ which provides ‘brevity of criteria sets, clarity of language, and explicit statements of the constructs embodied in the diagnostic criteria’ (American Psychiatric Association 1994.  xv) and is thus regarded as a useful guide to clinical practice among psychiatrists.  However, one needs to problematize the epistemological and political processes that transform this manual into a highly mobile text (Blommaert 2010) which is able to shape healthcare policies around the globe.  To a great extent, but not exclusively, two interrelated socio-cultural and discursive dynamics contribute to the global itinerary of this text and constitute a process Briggs (2005) describes as the globalization of medical epistemologies.  (1) the medicalization of society.  and (2) epistemological colonization produced by what Connell (2007) and Grosfoghel (2011) refer to as the universalizing tendencies of ‘Western’ theories.  ‘[M]edicalization describes a process by which nonmedical problems become defined and treated as medical problems, usually in terms of illness and disorders’ (Conrad 2007.  4).  This is the case in transsexuality, but it is not restricted to it.  A number of human experiences have also been medicalized, such as baldness, menstruation, hyperactivity, ageing, etc.  Conrad argues that medicalization is a form of social control.  by redefining such life experiences in medical terms and imposing treatment procedures, a line between what is normal and healthy and what is abnormal and, thus, unhealthy, is drawn.  This, in turn, gives medicine the power to prescribe which human experiences, subjectivities and bodies are deemed appropriate.  In this scenario, the DSM is both constituted by and constitutive of such medico-social processes.  On the one hand, it reflects these broader social dynamics.  on the other, it performatively produces (new) disorders and foments their medical surveillance.  The publication of the DSM-V in 2012 illustrates the extent to which processes of medicalization have reached, as it considerably multiplied the number of mental disorders a psychiatrist can treat.  among them we find, for instance, male hypoactive sexual desire disorder (tellingly, there is no female counterpart to this).  The financial interests of pharmaceutical industries also deserve part of the credit for the intensification of this process (Conrad 2007).  In this context, it is difficult to determine which comes first.  the disorder or the drugs.  Conrad seems to believe that in many cases the creation of a disease follows the production of a drug.  For instance, Conrad explains that, in the 1970s, the pharmaceutical company Upjohn discovered minoxidil was able to lower heart rate.  During clinical trials for hypertension, however, researchers accidentally noticed male patients grew new hair on their heads.  thus new target consumers for minoxidil were created and baldness became a medical problem.  With regards to transsexuality, its close relation to the developments in endocrinology in the 20th century, the growing hormone market and the technological advances in plastic and genital reconstructive surgery make gender transitions possible and highly profitable in some countries.  The second process that contributes to the global mobility of the DSM, and, as a consequence, to the widespread circulation of the APA’s worldviews and epistemic investments, has to do with epistemological colonization.  Central as it is to the globalization of certain texts and their effects on institutional and epistemological practices, the importance of epistemological colonization to the pathologization of transsexuality is also the link between the discussion in this paper and the main topic of this Special Issue, i. e.  to reflect upon the global South and its contributions to the study of discourse, gender and sexuality.  In this sense, medicalization is, to a great extent, a by-product of epistemological colonization.  By epistemological colonization I refer to the dynamics ‘in which the North produces theory and the South must supposedly import it and apply it’ (Miskolci and Pelucio 2017.  72).  Or, in the case of medicine, it refers to the fact that ‘medical epistemologies and technologies have long been seen as produced in Euro-America for export to less-industrialized countries as bases for regulating bodies and diseases’ (Briggs 2005.  279).  Having in mind this unequal geopolitics of knowledge, Miskolci (2014.  13) explains that even in an increasingly decentred world we still witness the hegemony of academic [and scientific] exchange in which the North produces theories and the South is seen as a space for collecting data, making ethnographic incursions or applying (Northern) theories to particular cases.  This dynamics constitutes what Borba et al.  (2014) call North-normativity.  a politics of knowledge production and circulation that is centred in and dominated by the Northern hemisphere.  Such epistemological imbalance, in which theories produced in the global North become highly mobile, is the result of what Connell (2007) and Grosfoghel (2011) describe as the universalizing tendencies of ‘Western’ theories.  due to their political, scientific and linguistic power such theories are taken to be valid throughout the globe when, in fact, they involve a theoretical leap based on European or North American contexts.  This process ends up producing the North as the norm and the South as the exotic Other (Borba et al.  2014) only liable of being the object of study, never its subject.  In his discussion of the geopolitics of knowledge production and circulation, Sousa Santos (1995) argues that the focus of epistemological criticism should fall on knowledge practices and their concrete effects on other social practices.  With this in mind, he contends that we should value ‘Southern epistemologies’, which, according to him, are guided by three main tenets.  ‘learning that the South exists, learning to go to the South, and learning from the South and with the South’ (Sousa Santos 1995.  508).  Following in Sousa Santos’ steps, more recently there has been an attempt to challenge such dynamics of epistemological colonization in the work of Connell (2007), who argues for a ‘Southern theory’, and Comaroff and Comaroff (2012a, 2012b, 2012c), who advocate for a ‘Theory from the South’.  For these authors, ‘the South’ is a metaphor that refers not only to a neat geographical region.  Perhaps most importantly, the South involves multiple configurations of discursive, material, and historical positionalities marked by a heritage of colonization, social immobility, subalternity, cultural and economic exploitation, Othering and, as in the case of transsexuality in Brazil and elsewhere, imposition of ex-centric textual standards that limit the scope of social action in institutional life and beyond.  In this sense, there is not only the geographical South as we know it, but also the South within the North.  for instance, Latin American sex workers in Europe (Piscitelli 2012), African asylum seekers in Belgium (Maryns 2006), and all those who, despite living in the global North, have very limited citizenship and chances for social mobility.  There is also, of course, the North within the South.  multinational corporations in India, petrol millionaires in Nigeria, etc.  Or, as Comaroff and Comaroff explain, ‘there is much south in the north, much north in the south, and [.  .  . ] more of both to come’ (2012b.  20).  In other words, ‘the South cannot be defined a priori in substantive terms.  The label refers to a relation, not a thing in or for itself’ (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012b.  20, original emphasis).  As the Comaroffs contend, given the current dynamics of capitalism, globalization and modernity, the South is often the first to feel the effects of world-historical processes and, thus, it provides us ‘the angle of vision [.  .  . ] from which to estrange our world in its totality in order better to make sense of its present and future’ (Comaroff and Comaroff 2012c, n. d. , original emphasis).  It is in this sense that Moita Lopes (2006) urges sociolinguists to ‘hear the voices from the South’.  According to this author, if sociolinguistics and other language-related fields of inquiry aim to be socially responsive and capable of intervening in the world, they should produce politically engaged knowledge with (not about) those who have been excluded from the benefits of modernity and have had their voices muted by the workings of the epistemological imbalances and discursive colonization discussed earlier.  In this vein, this politically engaged knowledge would be the result of the analytical attention to voice in the most Hymesian sense.  that is, a reconstruction of silenced voices (Hymes 1996) in a blatant political attempt to challenge the discursive dynamics that entrap their possibilities for agency.  A sociolinguistics from the South, to paraphrase the Comaroffs (2012c), is neither for the south nor necessarily from the south.  It is about the effects of the global circulation of certain discursive frameworks and institutional practices on the South and, mutatis mutandis, the effects of the South on discourse, language, institutions and on the production of knowledge within the field. 3 Such a sociolinguistics would pay due attention to both the macrosociological and macro-political mechanisms that allow certain discourses to travel globally and to their local microdiscursive effects.  Discursive colonization would be its bread and butter.  The case under scrutiny here is, to a great extent, a result of the incorporation of the APA’s pathologizing epistemology onto the SUS which provides free healthcare to the Brazilian population.  It should not be implied, though, that trans-specific healthcare in the global North is without its specific problems.  The main difference between public gender reassignment clinics in Brazil (such as the PAIST) and in the U. S.  lies in that fact that, in countries where trans-specific healthcare is only provided by private clinics, transsexual people have a little more room for negotiation.  This is so due to a process viviane v.  (2015), a Brazilian transfeminist activist, calls the ‘privatization of autonomy’.  In other words, due to the fact that in the U. S.  and elsewhere, trans people can only undergo hormone therapy and gender reassignment surgeries via private clinics, they seem to have more leeway to negotiate the quality of their healthcare.  Class is an important vector for agency here.  precisely because of who can afford operations and hormones, in the U. S.  ‘trans’ is sometimes seen as an upper-class identity. 4 However, little do we know about what happens inside gender clinics in the global North.  The few studies available (see, for example, Speer 2009, 2010) take the status of transsexuality as a mental disorder for granted and have little to say about the intersubjective effects such pathologization produces within those clinics.  This lack of critical analytical attention to the dynamics of pathologization in these studies may derive from the fact that discursive colonization of trans identities is less salient in the clinics analysed by Speer.  The critique of these diagnostic criteria (and the processes that allow their global circulation) is in tune with the international campaign Stop Trans Pathologization (STP2012) which aims at releasing transsexual people’s healthcare needs from psychiatric surveillance and towards more nuanced understandings of gender outside medical discourses (Misse and Col-Planas 2010.  Bento and Pelucio 2012).  In this scenario, the Brazilian Transsexualizing Process emerges at the intersection of global discursive flows that pathologize transsexuality and transsexual people’s local understandings of their bodies and subjective experiences.  IMPORTED TEXTUALITIES IN THE BRAZILIAN ‘TRANSSEXUALIZING PROCESS’.  As Bento (2006) explains, the individuals who the APA considers to be suffering from a gender disorder were at the epicentre of epistemological conflicts between the 1950s and 1970s in the U. S. A. .  different fields of medicine tried to explain the characteristics and the origin of transsexuality within their own scientific lenses.  Bento, in fact, argues that these epistemological conflicts have produced diverging explanations of this ‘disorder’.  biological and psychoanalytical fields of definition were established.  Despite being contradictory amongst themselves, but due to their apparent scientific objectivity, these theories made the inclusion of transsexuality in the APA manual possible.  The history of the APA’s interest in gender transition is a complex one which I am prevented from exploring in detail due to space constraints.  It is important to note, however, the centrality two diverging medical explanations have in the current institutional standards of textuality which regulate transsexual people’s and physicians’ lives in gender clinics around the globe.  These theories are those of the endocrinologist, Harry Benjamin, and those of the psychoanalyst, Robert Stoller.  Despite their differences, both shape what the APA (and as a consequence, the Brazilian government) understands as who counts as a ‘true transsexual’ (Benjamin 1999 [1966]).  Throughout this paper, I use the term ‘true transsexual’ between quotation marks to point to its origins in systems of knowledge/power which produce transsexuality as a mental disorder.  In this sense, the use of the concept in this format aims to highlight its diagnostic character, which is based on idealizations of what constitutes an allegedly authentic transsexuality (see also Borba 2015, 2016a, 2016b).  In his book, The Transsexual Phenomenon (1999 [1966]), Benjamin argues that transsexuality is a matter of biological determination.  Benjamin explains that the human sex is comprised of eight different ‘sexes’.  genetic, gonadal, germinal, endocrinological, phenotypical, psychological, legal and social.  Due to unnamed biological processes, transsexuality is the result of a radical dissociation of the psychological sex from the other ones.  Such dissociation produces a gender identity that is not in accordance with the more biologically based sexes of the body.  Benjamin explains, however, that this separation of the psychological sex may have different degrees and as such there are six types of transsexuality.  Only the most intense (types V and VI) should be classified ‘true transsexuals’ and thus should be considered for sex reassignment surgeries.  In Benjamin’s (1999 [1966].  11) view, the ‘true transsexual’.  feel[s] that they belong to the other sex, they want to be and function as members of the opposite sex, not only to appear as such.  For them, their sex organs, the primary (testes) as well as the secondary (penis and others) are disgusting deformities that must be changed by the surgeon’s knife.  (emphasis in original) Viewing transsexuality in these terms, Benjamin always defended the necessity of sex reassignment surgeries.  Since psychological sex is more ingrained, one should modify the morphology of the body, which, due to technological advances, may be transformed.  This would make more coherent individuals, as linearity among the different sexes would be restored, and, thus, the cultural intelligibility matrix (Butler 2003 [1990]) would be kept intact.  Benjamin’s views, however, did not go unchallenged.  One of the most important figures against sex reassignment surgeries was the psychoanalyst Robert Stoller, to whom transsexuality was the product of dysfunctional socialization within gender roles in the family.  Stoller focussed his efforts on analysing the socialization processes that would supposedly lead to gender non-conforming behaviours in adulthood.  To this end, the psychoanalyst worked with young boys whose parents were concerned about their ‘effeminacy’.  In his book, The Transsexual Experience (Stoller 1982 [1975]), he proposes that the origin of gender non-conforming behaviour in children (which could lead to the desire to undergo sex reassignment in the future) is the product of traumatic psychosocial dynamics imposed by the children’s relationship with their parents, more specifically the mother.  Following Freud’s concept of castration anxiety, Stoller suggests that the mother of a prospective transsexual person is a masculine woman whose penis envy is so strong that she transfers her unfulfilled desires onto her son.  This produces family dynamics in which the mother is powerful and dominating and the father is absent and emotionally unavailable.  In this context, the father cannot establish himself as a model and the Oedipus complex is interrupted, among other things, by the excess of physical contact between mother and child.  Stoller believed that it was possible to inculcate gender-conformity in these children via what he termed the ‘therapeutically motivated Oedipus complex’ (Stoller 1982 [1975].  101) in which the (male) therapist must serve as a ‘representative of society, health and of conformity with the external reality’ (1982 [1975].  80) providing the child with an ‘appropriate’ model of masculinity.  In his clinical practice, Stoller attempted to lead the child to disidentify with his envious mother, which was supposed to turn the child’s attention to stereotypically masculine activities, games and clothing preferences.  What is significant for the purposes of this paper is the centrality Stoller gave to childhood activities and to socialization.  The DSM-IVR definition of GID is a Benjamin-Stoller hybrid.  This diagnostic manual establishes the set of ‘symptoms’ individuals desiring to undergo sex reassignment surgeries must demonstrate in order to be diagnosed as ‘true transsexuals’ in the APA’s terms.  As such, the text imposes certain narrative demands (Coupland, Garret and Williams 2005) which must be fulfilled if one is to be granted institutional authorization to have one’s healthcare covered.  According to the DSM, there are four main symptoms a psychiatrist must pay attention to in order to diagnose someone as a ‘true transsexual’ (Figure 1).  I will not delve into a detailed discussion of the diagnostic criteria at this point but I will clarify them later on whenever relevant for understanding the interactions under investigation in this paper.  It is important to note, however, that in this manual, stereotypical gender behaviours make the reentextualization of Benjamin’s and Stoller’s theories in the DSM text possible.  The symptoms of GID do not merely materialize the medicalization of transsexuality.  in a broader sense, such entextualizations medicalize gender and, more significantly, the non-linearity between sex and gender.  As such, the DSM text is a vector of social control that attempts to maintain the current matrix of gender intelligibility (Bento 2006).  As I argue elsewhere (Borba 2015, 2016a, 2016b), by pathologizing gender transition through the supposed neutrality and objectivity of scientific language (Martınez-Guzman andI ~nıguez-Rueda 2010), this text homogenizes transsexual experiences and, thus, effaces the idiosyncrasies of alternative context-specific forms of transsexuality by producing it as a medical fact.  For a transsexual person to have free access to gender clinic services (hormone therapy and reassignment surgeries may all be covered by the state), they must abide by the rules of the most recent legislation of the FBM, i. e.  Resolution 1. 955/2010 which replicates the pathologization of transsexuality promulgated by the DSM.  The Resolution affirms that sex reassignment surgeries are the appropriate procedure for ‘treating’ the disorder.  In other words, by re-establishing an alleged coherence between the gender of identification and the sexual morphology, the disorder disappears and a sense of linearity is reinstated. 