INTRODUCTION.  This study investigates narrative development from a multimodal perspective of a less-studied language, Zulu, a Bantu language spoken in South Africa, and compares this development to a Romance language, French.  We explore similarities and differences of narrative ability from (i) a developmental and (ii) a cross-linguistic perspective in a comparison of these linguistically non-related languages.  Most literature on the development of pragmatic ability usually investigates one modality – speech.  Several studies have shown evidence that during face-to-face and verbal communication, a speaker or listener integrates information from both auditory and visual sources into a single message (Beattie, .  Beattie & Shovelton, .  Kendon, , .  Kita & Özyürek, , McNeill, ).  Oral narrative performance includes auditory (linguistic signals and prosody) and visual (gesture) information.  However, the way that people integrate speech and gesture into their narrative behaviour is highly dependent on language and culture (Colletta et al. , ).  The oral narrative from a multimodal perspective.  Speakers usually organize experiences and memories of human happenings in the form of a narrative (Berman, .  Bruner, .  Peterson & McCabe, ).  The narrative format is conventional, culturally transmitted, and restricted by each individual user’s level of mastery.  Fayol () explains that from a cognitive perspective in order to understand a narrative, a listener must construct a mental model of a situation to facilitate comprehension of that situation.  In terms of language production, the construction of an original story is a complex and demanding process involving planning and organizing ideas beyond the sentence level as well as self-regulation of formulation and presuppositional capacities, i. e. , pragmatic skills (Hadley & Schuele, .  Moonsamy, Jordaan & Greenop, ).  Thus, to narrate a story requires the integration of several abilities.  In addition to linguistic difficulties, it presents a more cognitive challenge of developing the contents in hierarchically ordered sequential structures.  Available research on narrative abilities mainly focuses on one dimension, the verbal dimension (oral or written), and the dimension of gesture is yet to be included to produce a better understanding of the contextualization of language knowledge and development.  Over the past thirty years, research on gesture and its relation to speech points to the multimodal nature of language (Calbris, .  Kendon, .  McNeill, ).  Daily human communication is mediated by a constant and intertwined flow of auditory speech signals and visual–kinesic gesture signals.  Whilst there is no consensus of what could be a ‘universal’ classification of gestures (for examples see Guidetti, Fibigerova & Colletta, ), the one proposed by McNeill (, ) is a heuristic one.  Speakers spontaneously produce gestures that are directly linked to speech and the verbal message content.  Co-speech gestures appear to have multiple functions.  on the one hand, they convey information to the interlocutor (Alibali, Kita & Young, .  Goldin-Meadow & Butcher, .  Kendon, , .  McNeill, ), and on the other hand, they seem to fulfil some cognitive functions.  i. e. , some studies suggest that gestures also serve a purpose for speakers to access the mental lexicon in spontaneous speech (de Ruiter, .  Krauss, Chen & Chawla, ).  Some referential gestures (pointing and representational gestures) are used to indicate the referent and represent objects and ideas (Alibali et al. , .  McNeill, ).  Other ‘pragmatic’ gestures help the speaker express his/her immediate intentions, mental states, and feelings (Kendon, ).  They help frame the utterance by expressing its illocutionary force.  They also help to structure the discourse production at various levels from sentence components, such as the syllable or word, to discourse components, such as the thesis and its arguments, or when retelling and commenting during a narrative (see Kendon, , for a comprehensive review of the functions of gesture).  All in all, research on gesture has demonstrated the multimodal nature of face-to-face and verbal communication.  A speaker or listener integrates auditory and acoustic (linguistic, prosodic) and visual (gesture) information into a single message (Beattie, .  Beattie & Shovelton, .  Kendon, , .  Kita & Özyürek, .  McNeill, ).  Due to their functional polyvalence, co-speech gestures play a large part in the communicative process (Colletta, .  Kendon, .  McNeill, ).  The speaker has the opportunity to re-enact, to recount, and to comment while using the correct linguistic devices to ensure coherence and cohesion.  For instance, depending on the discourse context, gesticulation can substitute for the verbal message, modulate it, or make it more precise.  In a narrative, gesture takes the role of ‘voice’ (i. e. , narrative focus) and can thus determine the perspective and level of narration.  Gesture has the capacity to highlight what is important in the context of discourse and what is not.  Gesture and speech in narrative development.  Consequently, being competent in a narrative requires knowledge of the structural syntactic and semantic properties of that language at the sentential level, as well as knowledge of the pragmatic properties of well-formed discourse (Hickmann, ).  The ability to produce coherent narrative texts develops in parallel with the increase in cognitive and linguistic skills of the child (Berman, , .  Berman & Slobin, ).  For instance, children younger than five years rarely produce causal chain sequences.  rather, they produce script-like stories, i. e. , short prototypical action sequences such as the ones children spontaneously act in free play (mummy feeding baby, teacher teaching child, doctor nursing patient, etc. ).  Older children start to verbalize chained sequences of actions as they appear in the event or story they recount.  yet they merely juxtapose facts until the age of nine to ten years (Fayol, ).  Considering the pragmatic heterogeneity of oral narratives (Labov, .  Laforest, .  McNeill, ), telling a story also involves backtracking in the event frame.  For example, when retelling a complex event, the narrator may not follow the order of events as they originally appeared and may have to mark every break he is making in the narrative thread during narration.  Moreover, narrating can be viewed as a complex discourse behaviour involving ‘metadiscourse’ in the form of personal commentary (explicitation, explanation, and evaluation in the form of personal judgement (Labov, .  Laforest, .  Peterson & McCabe, ).  In this way, a narrator can incorporate his/her own experience shaped by his/ her social and cultural experience, as well as other factors such as literacy.  By the age of ten, the child has not yet fully acquired complex discursive skills such as organizing text on both the ‘narrative’ level and the ‘metadiscourse’, i. e. , ‘meta-narrative’ and ‘para-narrative’ levels (Colletta, .  McNeill, ).  Here the narrative level refers to the account of events while the meta-narrative level refers to structuring the story during its narration by the speaker and the para-narrative level refers to the inclusion of personal experience and references linking the narrators to their narratives.  Becoming a competent narrator is a prolonged process that extends into the school years due to the multiple, embedded demands which include (i) the mastery of different skills in the cognitive domain (Karmiloff-Smith, ) and (ii) knowing about the specific devices each language has “in order to regulate the distinction between new and given information” (Carmiol & Sparks, , p.  ).  As they develop their narrative skills, children are faced with several challenges, such as having to produce coherent, cohesive (structured) units of extended discourse.  they need to understand that their audience may not share the same knowledge about the events they themselves are speaking about.  and children also have to incorporate the possibility that the listener may not interpret the events that are being told in the same way (Hymes, .  Ninio & Snow, ).  Therefore, the path from becoming a native speaker to a proficient speaker of any given language is a long developmental trajectory (Berman, , .  Berman & Slobin, .  Hickmann, ), and children in primary school would not be expected to have completed the process from emergence to mastery.  Most of the literature on the role of gestures and speech focuses either on the early acquisition period from birth to three years old (see Capirci, Iverson, Pizzuto & Volterra, .  Goldin-Meadow & Butcher, .  Guidetti, , ) or on adults (Beattie, .  Kendon, .  Kita & Özyürek, , .  Loehr, ).  Studying the role of gesture in the early acquisition period and the adult competency does not inform us on the development of co-speech gesture, which happens to occur gradually and developmentally.  However, some studies (Colletta, .  Colletta, Pellenq & Guidetti, .  Graziano, .  Kunene, ) have shown that the production of gesture develops with age.  the older the child, the more gesture becomes varied and specialized during discourse as it gradually becomes similar to adult usage.  Cross-linguistic research on oral narratives.  There is little or no literature that explores the development of narrative ability in Zulu- speaking children.  Current and existing literature on South African Bantu languages focuses on various aspects of linguistic competency, such as the acquisition of the passive construction (Demuth, .  Suzman, ) or the acquisition of the noun class system (Gxilishe, ) in early language acquisition (until the age of about four years).  Current literature on gesture and narrative development focuses mostly on Romance and Germanic languages, Japanese, and Turkish (Colletta, .  Graziano, .  Kita & Özyürek, ), so that there is little or no information on gesture development in any African language, including the Bantu language family.  This lack of literature motivated the present study.  Several studies have shown that culture places limitations on language forms in many aspects, such as the conventionalized forms of interpersonal interaction and the use and form of speech acts (Gumperz, .  SavilleTroike, ).  Consequently, in order to use language competently, children have to use the semantic, syntactic, and pragmatic conventions of their communities for social interactions (Carmiol & Sparks, ).  Culture also shapes non-verbal aspects of communication, including ritualized acts (Loehr, ), the use of facial expressions (Ekman & Friesen, ), conventional gestural forms (Brookes, , .  Kendon, .  Morris, ), and co-speech gestures (Allen et al. , .  Kendon, .  Kita, .  Kita & Özyürek, .  McNeill, ), as well as semantic distinctions in placement verbs depending on the language (Gullberg & Narasimhan, ).  For example, Kendon (, ) compared Neapolitan gesture and British gesture practices in which he examined the Neapolitan’s preference for using gestures more frequently than the British, as well as using them as an exclusive mode of communication.  The strong implication is that through socialization, a child acquires and masters these non-verbal resources along with the verbal in ways that are acceptable in their society.  In a related study by Colletta and colleagues (), the authors compared speech and co-speech gestures observed using a narrative retelling task in three different language groups.  French, American English, and Italian.  Their findings showed that the French children produced longer narratives, while the Italian children gestured more than their French and American counterparts.  However, despite other minor differences, the results showed a common developmental trend between the three language groups.  In all three languages, older children were found to give more detailed narratives than their younger counterparts.  they inserted more comments, tended to gesture more, and used different gestures – specifically, gestures that contribute to the narrative structure.  Taken together, the findings helped the authors propose a tentative model of multimodal narrative development in which major changes in later language acquisition occur despite differences in language and culture.  The narrative in Zulu and French.  Zulu is an agglutinative polymorphemic language, that is, a language with affixes attached to the root or core of the word and a complex nominal class system (Pretorius & Bosch, ).  French is a Romance language, and, unlike Zulu, it is an analytic language.  French grammar is characterized by a two-way gender distinction.  masculine or feminine.  In terms of syntactic differences, French requires an explicit subject, whereas Zulu is a NULL-SUBJECT (or PRO-DROP) language, such as Italian and Spanish, and does not require an explicit subject once the referent has been introduced initially.  Does this linguistic feature have an effect on the production of co-speech.  Several studies report a higher frequency in the production of representational gestures that seem to disambiguate reference, and to compensate for the absence of explicit anaphora or for an erroneous use of anaphora (Cristilli, Capirci & Graziano, .  Yoshioka, ) The cultural aspects are not the main focal point of this study.  however, it is not easy to divorce the manner in which narratives are produced in an oral culture compared with a written culture, as this informs on the narrative strategy a speaker uses.  It is important to give a brief overview of the cultural aspects that have a direct link with the narrative performance in this study.  Zulu is a language with a long oral tradition that only became a written language in the nineteenth century.  Information, culture, and education were transmitted through oral narratives and performance (Groenewald, .  Ramaila, ).  The oral tradition is still present, and story-telling plays a very important role in Zulu culture.  Children hear tales from their caregivers before going to bed as well as during the day.  Suzman (, p.  ) noted “distinctive features of adults speech style in talking to children .  . 