In language development, bilinguals often lag behind monolinguals of the same age.  Bilingual children are not delayed in all aspects of language development relative to monolingual children, but primarily those aspects linked to frequency of exposure in a particular language, such as vocabulary (see review in Nicoladis, ).  Bilingual children often score below the monolingual norm or below same-age monolinguals on vocabulary tests in at least one of their languages (Bialystok, Craik & Luk, .  Bialystok, Luk, Peets & Yang, .  Bialystok, Majumder & Martin, .  Junker & Stockman, .  Nicoladis, .  Oller, Pearson & CoboLewis, .  Uchikoshi, .  Umbel & Oller, .  Umbel, Pearson, Fernández & Oller, .  Verhallen & Schoonen, ).  Bilingual children and adults also show greater difficulty in lexical access (i. e.  they take longer or make mistakes when accessing specific words in the lexicon for production) than monolinguals (Gollan & Acenas, .  Gollan, Montoya, Cera & Sandoval, .  Yan & Nicoladis, ).  Importantly, limited vocabulary may lead to limitations on bilinguals’ communicative and conceptual skills (Keith & Nicoladis, .  Zareva, ).  The primary purpose of the present study was to investigate bilingual children’s strategies in choosing words in the context of a narrative task to document the strength of any relationship between linguistic (vocabulary) deficits, if they are found, and communicative and conceptual skills.  As we will detail below, many previous studies on lexical access have relied on experimental tasks, such as picture-naming or picture-based choice tests.  However, there is a discussion in the literature that these standard measures should be interpreted carefully because they are extremely impacted by different cultures and linguistic input (de Villiers, ).  Unlike these experimental tasks, in narrative tasks there is no necessary correct word.  Narratives rely heavily on imagery (Mallan, ) and are more cognitively complex than these common experimental tasks, given that narratives are intrinsically dependent on the story-teller’s causal thinking structure (Trabasso & Broek, ).  The choice of a term often reflects the story-teller’s conception of the story (Downing, ).  Downing showed that monolingual adults commonly used a basic kind term for most nouns when telling a story.  However, these adults deviated from basic terms when they were trying to convey an attitude or perspective on the story.  In narratives, it is more important to construct a story grammar, i. e.  the story-teller needs to represent the narrative events and describe the story units in a sequential order (Herman, .  Mandler, ), than to remember a particular word.  Therefore, the selection of what is important to remember and to retell relies on the relationships between narrative events and their representation of the story (Trabasso & Broek, ).  Although several authors have investigated the development of narratives in children (e. g.  Pearson, .  see also Verhoeven & Lundquist, ), none of them investigated lexical choice in terms of lexicon organization and strategies used to refer to target concepts.  As far as we know, Downing () was the only one who investigated lexical choice in narratives in such terms, and then only in a group of monolingual adults.  This dearth in the literature does not permit us to make clear predictions about how bilingual children, with greater lexical access difficulties, would choose words differently from monolingual children in the context of a narrative task.  Therefore, before we address the principal question guiding this research, we first propose two background studies to allow us to characterize how younger children (Study ) and adult late second language (L) learners (Study ) access words in a narrative context.  If bilingual children’s lexical choices resemble those of younger children, then they could be characterized as demonstrating developmental delay.  If their choices resemble those of the adult late L learners, then they could be characterized as demonstrating compensatory strategies, but not general communicative delay.  Conceptual delay in lexical access.  Some authors have proposed that lexical organization and retrieval reflect lexical development, and may be a fairer semantic assessment than acquired vocabulary (de Villers, .  Seymour, Roeper & de Villiers, ).  Previous studies have characterized lexical access differences between bilinguals and same-aged monolinguals as developmental delays (e. g.  Keith & Nicoladis, ).  If so, bilingual children with lexical access delay might resemble younger children in their way of choosing words to convey a story.  Study  compares three- to five-year-old and seven- to ten-year-old monolingual children.  We thought that younger children might be more likely than older children to omit target concepts, either because they cannot access them, or because their story grammars are still rudimentary (Hayes & Kelly, ).  If so, they might tell shorter stories (i. e.  use fewer word tokens to tell the story) and lexicalize fewer target words.  Another possible manifestation of conceptual delay could be observed in children’s lexical organization and the non-target word choices.  Previous research has suggested that monolingual children’s mental lexicons show a shift in relations between words around approximately seven and ten years of age, from primarily schematic to primarily categorical relations (Brown & Berko, .  Danovitch & Keil, .  Nelson, .  Perraudin & Mounoud, .  Sheng, McGregor & Marian, ).  Schematic relations are connections established between words when taking into consideration how they follow each other in a discourse or between objects and their relations in the physical word (Perraudin & Mounoud, ).  Categorical relations refer to taxonomic relations between words or objects (Perraudin & Mounoud, .  see also Nelson, , for a similar conceptualization of the developmental shift in the mental lexicon).  For example, if we show children a picture with dog on it and ask them to say the first word that comes to mind, some may give an answer guided by the schematic relation like bone (e. g.  dogs may be associated with the action of hiding or gnawing on a bone).  Others may give an answer showing a categorical relationship with a word like cat, since both cat and dog are from the same taxonomic category, animals.  In the context of a narrative task, children who have not yet undergone the schematic–categorical shift might not necessarily use words that could be helpful to the listener’s comprehension when they do not produce the non-target word.  For example, they might produce nouns with schematic relations to the target words (such as tail for the target cat).  Some studies of simultaneous bilingual children have shown little to no difference from monolinguals for schematic or categorical responses (Namei, .  Reustle, .  Sheng et al. , ), and others have found that bilinguals produce more schematic responses than same-aged monolinguals (Keith & Nicoladis, .  see also Verhallen & Schoonen, ).  Generally these studies used picture-naming or word-association tasks to assess these differences.  For instance, one study showed that seven- to ten-year-old simultaneous French–English bilinguals produced more schematically related words on a picture-naming task than monolinguals (Keith & Nicoladis, ).  The rate of schematically related words was negatively correlated to children’s vocabulary in each of their languages.  It is possible that studies have found differing results with simultaneous bilinguals because they can vary in whether their vocabulary size differs or equals that of monolinguals.  Consistent with that interpretation, Sheng et al.  () found no significant difference in English vocabulary scores between the Mandarin–English bilingual children and the monolingual children, and also no differences between the groups on the rate of schematic-based choices.  The link between vocabulary size in a particular language and the schematic–categorical shift could explain why we observe schematic choices in adult and child second language learners.  L learners have been reported to produce more schematic responses in their L than in their L, and more than native speakers (Norrby & Hakansson, .  Zareva, ).  The same pattern of results has been observed with sequential bilingual children (Verhallen & Schoonen, ).  The use of categorical relations increases as L learners’ proficiency in L increases (Zareva, ).  In sum, some researchers have argued that, to the extent that bilingual children show differences from same-aged monolinguals in lexical access, they may be showing a developmental delay.  In the context of a narrative task, developmental delay in lexical access could be manifested in the form of shorter stories, fewer instances of lexicalizing particular words, and less frequent use of categorical responses when the non-target word is produced.  In Study , we test whether these characteristics are, indeed, true of younger monolingual children relative to older monolingual children.  Compensatory strategies for lexical access difficulties.  As noted above, recounting a narrative involves remembering and imaging what one would like to say.  Bilingual children might be at least as advanced in the underlying cognitive abilities necessary for narration relative to same-aged monolinguals.  For instance, Pearson () showed that, after correcting for multiple analyses, bilingual children performed as well as monolingual children in narrative discursive elements (e. g.  mention of key content, event sequence, and reference to characters).  If so, when they could not access particular words important for narration, they might use other means to express them.  As with many everyday language tasks, speakers could explain what they meant in multiple words (e. g.  it goes meow), coin a novel word (the meow-animal), or use categorically related words like a superordinate noun (e. g.  animal instead of cat).  Study  compares intermediate second language learning adults’ lexical choice with that of monolingual children in middle childhood.  We expected the adults to attempt to lexicalize important concepts in relating the narrative, as opposed to omitting them, but not necessarily with a specific set of target words (as would be required in a picture-naming task).  Some research has shown bilingual advantages in both imagery and creativity over monolinguals (Chuneyeva, .  Kachru, .  see Simonton, , for review).  As noted earlier, narrative tasks rely heavily on imagery and creativity.  Bilinguals might use strategies based on imagery and creativity to compensate for lexical access difficulties, thereby showing little to no difference from monolinguals in their choice of words.  However, it is worth noticing that many of the studies showing bilingual advantages have only been done with adults, so it is not clear that they will generalize to children.  Finally, in Study , to address the principal research question, we compare French–English bilingual children with French and English monolingual children from middle childhood.  If bilingual children’s lexical choice can be characterized as delayed, then they should show the same patterns of lexicalization as the younger children in Study .  Alternatively, bilingual children’s lexical choice might more resemble that of L adults, perhaps manifested as compensatory strategies.  In Study , we make comparisons across studies in order to further investigate bilinguals’ closeness to L adults and to younger monolingual children.  Although the L adults in the present study have Mandarin as their first language (L), and not French, as the simultaneous bilinguals from Study , it should not matter for the variables under investigation.  We are interested in the strategies that the L adults will use to retell the narrative in a language in which they potentially cannot access (or do not know) the words for all the key concepts shown in the narrative.  not on how the L interferes in L performance.  <Middle> STUDY . Participants.  The participants in this study consisted of thirty-four English monolinguals, separated into two age groups.  One group was composed of fifteen children aged between three and five years ( boys,  girls).  The other group included nineteen children between eight and ten years ( boys,  girls).  Their average age was, respectively, .  (SD = . ), and .  (SD = . ).  All the children were living in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.  According to the children’s parents, the children had no significant or regular exposure to more than one language.  Therefore, the older children had approximately twice the exposure to English than the younger ones.  Materials.  All participants watched the same four-minute excerpt from the non-verbal Pink Panther cartoon In the Pink of the Night.  This story shows the Pink Panther being awakened by an annoying cuckoo bird, and the Pink Panther’s multiple attempts at trying to get rid of it.  The choice of a short cartoon excerpt was meant to not overload the younger children’s memory, disentangling vocabulary knowledge from memory effects.  Procedure.  Participants were encouraged to watch the cartoon carefully, as they were going to be asked to describe it to someone later.  After viewing the cartoon, they were asked to retell what happened in the cartoon to a researcher.  Transcription and coding.  The children’s retelling of the cartoon was transcribed in normal orthography (see supplementary online content for narrative examples, available at < journals. cambridge. org/JCL>).  The length of the stories the children told was counted in word tokens, not counting false starts or self-repetitions.  We counted the number of word types the children used in the retelling the whole story, as well as the number of word types within fifty word tokens, as an indicator of the children’s vocabulary size.  The length limit of fifty word tokens was determined based on the shortest narrative among all the participants across studies.  We also identified thirteen target words ( nouns and  verbs) that were important in telling the story, and then searched the children’s stories for if and how they had lexicalized these targets.  The target words were.  (pink) panther, (cuckoo) clock, bridge, hands (of the clock), (alarm) clock, wrench, cuckoos, throws (off the bridge), dives, rows, throws (into the water), goes back (to bed), and hits.  Note that the words in parentheses were considered optional in identifying a child’s lexicalization as on target.  To identify these thirteen words, we started with twenty words generated by the second and third authors that they thought essential to telling the story.  We then looked through the transcripts of ten English monolingual adults, retaining the words that were used by six or more.  In analyzing the children’s results, we counted only the first mention of each of these concepts.  For each child, we calculated the percentage of the thirteen target words that were lexicalized (% concepts lexicalized).  The percentage of concepts lexicalized included both concepts for which the children used the target word and concepts for which they used other words or phrases.  The percentage of concepts lexicalized was calculated as the number of lexicalized words divided by thirteen (the total number of opportunities to lexicalize the key concepts).  To calculate whether the children had produced the target form or not, we used as the denominator the number of lexicalized concepts, resulting in the percentage of target forms.  So, for instance, if a child lexicalized eight of the targets and six were in the target form, we calculated for that child six out of eight, or % target production.  When the children did not produce the target noun, we coded for use of either (i) nouns that had a categorical relationship with the target, or (ii) other.  Nouns that were considered to have a categorical relationship with the target were either nouns from the same semantic category (e. g.  tiger for the target panther) or the superordinate category label (e. g.  animal for the target panther.  see Perraudin & Mounoud, ).  The other category most often included nouns with a schematic relation to the target noun (e. g.  song for the target cuckoo clock).  To calculate the rate of categorical responses, the denominator was the number of lexicalized concepts minus the number of target words.  For instance, if a child lexicalized eight of the targets, and four were categorical responses for nouns and one was the target word, we calculated for that child four out of seven ( minus ), or %, categorical responses.  As discussed above, Study  was designed to characterize what a developmental delay looks like.  Therefore, we compared younger and older children’s lexical strategies.  the latter with twice the time of exposure to English than the former.  If the simultaneous bilinguals from Study  show any delay, their performance should resemble that of the younger children.  In order to compare our participants groups we used either a t-test (or F test in Study ) when our variables were normally distributed, or the Wilcoxon W test (equivalent of a t-test for non-parametric data) when our variables were not normally distributed.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION.  STUDY .  The two leftmost columns of numbers in Table  summarize the averages of the dependent variables for the younger and older children.  There was a significant difference between the groups in terms of total word types (t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·), word tokens (t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·), and the number of types within fifty tokens (t() = ·, p = , d = ·).  As would be expected, the older children probably have a larger vocabulary, and therefore they used a significantly higher number of word types and tokens than the younger children.  For similar reasons, as shown in Table , the older children lexicalized more of the target concepts than the younger children, though this difference was only marginally significant (t() = ·, p = ·, d = ·).  Table  also summarizes the rate of target-word production.  There was a significant difference between the percentage of target words used by the older children when compared to the younger ones (t() = ·, p = ·).  As expected, the older children used significantly more target words than the younger children (d = ·).  Table  also shows the average percentage of categorical responses for nouns produced by the children.  Although the older children used more categorical responses, the difference was not statistically significant (W= ·, n. s. ).  In a final set of analyses we used Spearman’s correlation to investigate the relationship between (a) the rate of categorical responses and (b) the children’s age, word types, and types within fifty tokens.  We only found a marginally significant, and negative, correlation between types within fifty tokens and categorical responses (ρ = –·, p = ·).  this was true only for the older children.  Thus, the greater the number of types within fifty tokens, the lower the rate of categorical responses produced by the children.  In summary, in comparison to older children, younger children’s production of target words in a narrative context could be characterized as OMISSIVE.  They told shorter stories with less varied word types than older children.  They also lexicalized fewer of the target concepts than older children and produced fewer target items.  When producing categorical responses for nouns, the younger children and older children did not differ.  If bilingual children show delay in lexical choice and lexicon organization, they may also show an omissive narrative style.  STUDY . Participants.  The participants in this study consisted of the same nineteen English monolingual children ( boys,  girls), all aged between seven and ten years, who participated in Study , and fifteen Mandarin Chinese-speaking adults who were learning English as their second language ( men,  women), all aged between twenty-eight and thirty-nine years.  The participants’ average ages were, respectively, .  (SD = . ), and .  (SD = . ).  The adult late L learners grew up in mainland China and they started to speak English fluently when they moved, as adults, to countries where English was the predominant spoken language.  All of the adults had begun their intensive English-learning post-adolescence.  At the time of the study, all of the adults had spent at least one year (M = . , SD=. ) in an English-predominant part of the world.  On the basis of listening to the narratives, all the Chinese adults were classified as INTERMEDIATE SPEAKERS by an experienced English as a second language teacher.  There was no significant correlation between years of exposure to English and the number of word types (within fifty tokens) the adults used when retelling the story.  More importantly, there was no difference between the groups on the number of word types produced within fifty tokens.  Materials and procedure.  We followed the same materials and procedure as in Study , with two exceptions.  First, the adult late L learners watched the Pink Panther cartoon twice and retold the story once in Chinese and once in English (there were no differences between the English narratives of the adults who did the retelling first in English versus those of the adults who did the English retelling after they did it in Chinese).  The order of the two language sessions was counterbalanced.  The two language sessions were done on different days, usually about a week apart, with a native speaker experimenter.  We report here only on the adults’ L English stories.  Second, in analyzing the adults’ responses, we noticed a fair number of what we called CREATIVE responses (e. g.  a little bird which makes the clock as his home, when referring to the cuckoo clock.  or bought a flower and tried to use the flower to miss the bird, when referring to the Pink Panther throwing flowers on the river after thinking the bird was dead).  Creative responses were understood as the participants’ effort to convey through original expressions the target concepts that they do not have a word for, or could not access. 