An important topic in psycholinguistic research is the nature of sentence representations during language comprehension.  Information from several sources is used to yield an interpretation of a sentence.  Syntactic processing is usually considered an essential step, as the comprehender has to build a syntactic structure according to the morphosyntactic rules of a language.  Traditional theories assume that language processing is based on complete and detailed representations of the input.  In addition to syntactic algorithms, sentence comprehension may be driven by nonsyntactic constraints and simple processing heuristics.  The good-enough approach to language comprehension assumes that the comprehender has access to two processing routes.  a complete syntactic route and a heuristic route that utilizes word order and plausibility heuristics to produce sufﬁciently good representations of sentences (F.  Ferreira, 2003.  Ferreira, Bailey, & Ferraro, 2002).  While the comprehender uses a combination of syntactic algorithms and heuristics, he or she could bypass a full syntactic analysis when faced with complex or temporarily ambiguous structures.  Under the good-enough account of processing, the comprehender may settle for an interpretation of a temporarily ambiguous sentence based on heuristics rather than on elaborate syntactic algorithms.  The good-enough representation of a sentence may be incomplete and incompatible with the actual input, as supported by the misinterpretation of garden-path and passive sentences.  The syntactic algorithm and the heuristic parser may generate different representations of temporarily ambiguous sentences such as (1).  (1) The student praised by the principal received good grades.  The example sentence is temporarily ambiguous between a past-tense main clause and a passive reduced relative clause structure.  In neutral contexts, the pasttense main clause structure is typically the preferred interpretation, resulting in increased processing difﬁculty if the sentence is disambiguated toward the passive reduced relative analysis at the by-phrase (Altmann, 1998.  Frazier & Clifton, 1998.  MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994.  McRae, Spivey-Knowlton, & Tanenhaus, 1998.  Trueswell, 1996.  Trueswell, Tanenhaus, & Garnsey, 1994).  The main clause/reduced relative clause ambiguity has also been shown to pose parsing difﬁculties for second language (L2) readers when the initial interpretation must be revised upon disambiguation (Yang & Shih, 2013).  According to the goodenough approach, sentence comprehension could be based on heuristics, such as assignment of an agent role to the ﬁrst noun phrase and plausibility of the initial noun phrase as agent.  The comprehender may not construct an elaborate syntactic representation for the difﬁcult sentence, as heuristics offer a faster route.  Compared to ﬁrst language (L1) processing, L2 processing may be even more reliant on lexical or word-order heuristics while computing shallow good-enough syntactic representations (Clahsen & Felser, 2006.  Felser, Roberts, Gross, & Marinis, 2003).  To clarify whether the comprehender constructs an abstract syntactic representation for a temporarily ambiguous sentence, the study utilized structural priming as a means to probe syntactic representations during sentence comprehension.  Structural priming is the tendency to repeat a structural pattern that has been previously encountered (Bock, 1986).  The paper used the term structural priming rather than syntactic priming because part of structural priming might result from nonsyntactic sources (e. g. , Bock, Loebell, & Morey, 1992).  Prior exposure to a particular syntactic structure facilitates subsequent processing of the same or a related structure.  For example, if people encounter a sentence with passive voice, they are more likely than normal to use passives in subsequent sentences.  Structural priming taps into syntactic representation, as at least part of the priming effect depends on the repetition of syntactic structure across sentences and cannot be fully accounted for by the repetition of lexical items (e. g. 