Learning in any school subject depends on students’ proﬁciency in listening comprehension in academic contexts (Rost, 1994).  Classroom discourse has, for example, repeatedly been found to facilitate the acquisition of reading comprehension (cf.  Nystrand, 2006.  Wolf, Crosson, & Resnick, 2005).  Consequently, listening comprehension in academic contexts may be regarded as a basis for the acquisition of knowledge and academic achievement.  For the most part, communication in academic contexts is marked by a high level of “writtenness,” whether information is presented written or orally.  Academic listening texts possess characteristics of formal and planned discourse as they are lexically dense, context reduced, and characterized by textual structures that resemble those of written texts (Flowerdew & Miller, 1997).  Classroom talk may thus be localized at the interface of an oral–literate continuum where “oral” refers to prototypical speaking in everyday conversations and “literate” refers to prototypical writing in academic prose (Biber, 1995.  Tannen, 1982).  Although oral academic language is often less complex and contains fewer academic language features than written academic language (cf.  Corson, 1997.  Nagy & Townsend, 2012), oral and written academic language share important features, such as an informational focus and an abstract, impersonal style (Csomay, 2006).  Oral language in academic settings is therefore more complex and more difﬁcult to process than oral language in everyday conversations.  Accordingly, several researchers have assumed that everyday listening and academic listening comprehension may rely on different sets of subskills and have proposed deﬁnitions of academic listening comprehension and its components (cf.  Ferris & Tagg, 1996.  Richards, 1983.  Taylor & Geranpayeh, 2011).  Most of these deﬁnitions are based on the presumption that academic listening comprehension requires the listener to concentrate on as well as understand long stretches of speech without being able to use the facilitating functions of interactive discourse (Flowerdew, 1994).  For this particular type of listening comprehension, some authors propose speciﬁc comprehension subskills, such as the “differentiation between relevant and irrelevant information,” “command of strategies that support understanding (i. e. , taking notes),” “the ability to identify the topic, purpose and scope of a lecture,” or “making inferences” (e. g. , Buck, 2001.  Flowerdew, 1995.  Richards, 1983).  Yet it remains unclear how these skills may be operationalized and to what extent they are speciﬁc for listening in academic contexts.  To describe challenges of academic listening comprehension, it thus seems useful to resort to more general conceptualizations of academic language.  CHALLENGES OF ACADEMIC LANGUAGE.  The general differentiation between language skills needed to interact with others in informal contexts and those needed to understand school-related language has been addressed by various researchers (e. g. , Bailey & Butler, 2003.  Schleppegrell, 2004).  An important conceptual basis of this line of research was the distinction between basic interpersonal communication skills (BICS) and cognitive academic language proﬁciency (CALP) proposed by Cummins (1980).  According to Cummins (1980), BICS are deﬁned as the language skills needed in social situations. 