I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Although speakers and addressees have a large repertoire of conventional lexical meanings, they can go beyond these to communicate a seemingly indeﬁnite number of context-dependent meanings.  Metonymy is one case of this, where an expression is used to refer to something that falls outside its conventional denotation, with a clear associative relation linking the conventional denotation and the contextually determined, metonymic one.  Consider Nunberg’s () classic example in ().  () The ham sandwich left without paying.  Uttered by one waiter to another in a restaurant, the expression the ham sandwich refers to the customer who ordered the ham sandwich, and exploits the immediate accessibility (or salience) of the associative relation between the customer and his order.  Another common case is the use of names of artists or authors to refer to their works, as in Woolf is on the top shelf.  While such metonymic uses by adults are common, little is known about how metonymy is understood or used by children.  Do young children understand the pragmatics of metonymy, and do they use metonyms themselves.  If so, when does this ability emerge in development.  Children rely early on their pragmatic abilities in word learning, and are sensitive to speaker intentions (Bloom, ), discourse status (Akhtar, Carpenter & Tomasello, ), and speakers’ word choices (Clark, ).  Young children also make use of context in interpreting class extensions (Bushnell & Maratsos, ), polysemy (Rabagliati, Marcus & Pylkkänen, ), and, under some conditions, metaphors (Özçaliskan, ) and scalar terms (Papafragou & Musolino, .  but see also Noveck, ).  Does this early pragmatic skill extend to metonymy.  In this study, we investigate how three- to ﬁve-year-olds understand and produce novel metonyms.  We tested their ability to understand and explain metonymic meanings in a comprehension task designed for their level of world knowledge and linguistic skill.  We also looked at their ability to produce metonyms in two tasks.  In the ﬁrst, we focused on their use of metonymy as a shorthand device, and in the second, on its use in naming animates based on a salient property.  Evidence that young children can manage metonymic meanings would support the view that preschool children start to use ﬁgurative language early, along with some of the relevant pragmatic inferences.  The pragmatics of metonymy.  We can distinguish between two kinds of metonymy.  referential metonymy, which relates one entity with another (e. g.  The ham sandwich for ‘The customer who ordered the ham sandwich’, as in () above), and propositional metonymy, which relates two propositions (e. g.  The athlete made it to the podium for ‘The athlete won a medal’) (Warren, ).  In this study, we focus on referential metonymy.  The primary communicative function of referential metonymy is usually taken to be that of economizing on processing eﬀort in making a reference.  On this view, a metonym is a shorthand for a more elaborate expression, and the aim is quick and easy referent identiﬁcation (Lakoﬀ & Johnson, .  Nunberg, .  Papafragou, ).  Metonymy as a shorthand device diﬀers from linguistic abbreviation (or ellipsis), where actual words are omitted (e. g.  uttering The Commons for The House of Commons), in that it picks out a salient aspect of a referent to ‘stand for’ the referent as a whole, and is therefore sometimes described as a form of “cognitive abbreviation” (Nerlich & Clarke, , p.  ).  A metonymic shorthand of course also involves a kind of linguistic abbreviation in the sense that, in most cases, there exists a readily available paraphrase (e. g.  The ham sandwich vs.  The customer who ordered the ham sandwich).  however, it does not involve actual linguistic ellipsis.  Referential metonymy is often described as a ‘regular’ process, where metonymic expressions instantiate underlying patterns, either in the form of stable conceptual associations (so-called ‘conceptual metonymy’.  cf.  Lakoﬀ & Johnson, .  Radden & Kövecses, ) or even as the result of some kind of (lexical) rule (Apresjan, .  Copestake & Briscoe, .  Frisson & Pickering, ).  For example, the metonymic relation PRODUCER FOR PRODUCT is productive and makes it possible to understand the utterance John likes to read Needham as referring to books written by the author Needham, even though we might have never heard of this author before (Frisson & Pickering, ).  How are such metonymic patterns acquired.  And are children as sensitive to them as adults.  Our preliminary analyses of conversational interactions between children and their caregivers from the CHILDES database (MacWhinney, ) suggested that one productive metonymic pattern available to young children is COMPONENT FOR GAME, linguistically realized as play NP, as in Let’s play (the) zebras (‘the game that has zebras as a salient component’).  Metonymy, then, could well serve early on as a productive referential strategy for young children.  While much has been said about metonymy as a shorthand referential device in the theoretical literature, another communicative function of referential metonymy has received less attention, namely its use to highlight a particular property of the referent, thereby giving rise to a slight (sometimes witty or playful) deprecation of the referent (e. g.  The big mouth is coming to the meeting).  In these cases, referential metonymy serves as a naming device, much as nicknames do, where a salient property of an individual or object is used to create a new name (Papafragou, ).  While the use of (derogatory) metonymic nicknames (e. g.  Four Eyes, Chubby, Skinny Bones, etc. ) is well documented among primary school children (Crozier & Dimmock, ), little is known about its use among preschoolers.  Use of metonyms with a naming function might require more metalinguistic ability than simple shorthand uses, since the speaker replaces a conventional term with a new one to achieve a certain eﬀect. 