I N T R O D U C T I O N.  Children’s interpretation of contrast-marking prosody Although many aspects of language have been mastered by the age of five or six, other aspects, such as pragmatic understanding of the meaning of intonational contours, have longer developmental trajectories.  Many researchers have argued that young children do not rely on intonation in inferring the speaker’s pragmatic intention, affect, or emotional state (e. g.  Aguert, Laval, Le Bigot & Bernicot, .  Capelli, Nakagawa & Madden, .  Cruttenden, .  Cutler & Swinney, .  Hornby & Hass, .  Morton & Trehub, .  Quam & Swingley, .  Solan, .  Van Der Meulen, Janssen & Den Os, .  Wells, Peppe & Goulandris, .  Winner & Leekam, ).  Moreover, the ability to interpret an intonation contour that signals contrast is said to develop late, after age six, and slowly (Ito, Bibyk, Wagner & Speer, .  Ito, Jincho, Minai, Yamane & Mazuka, .  Speer & Ito, ).  For example, Cruttenden () tested British English-speaking ten-year-olds and adults to determine whether they could reliably identify the referents of utterances such as those in (a) and (b), given a choice of three pictured referents []–[].  () a.  It’s a very nice garden.  [fall–rise] b.  It’s a very nice garden. a nice garden but a house falling down a garden and a house, both very nice a garden overgrown but a very nice house (a) has the fall–rise pitch accent on the word garden, which results in a slight rise at the final position of the sentence.  This is typically associated with reservation (Cruttenden’s [] term) or contrast in meaning.  This reservation is expected to match the picture in [], in which the nice garden is contrasted with the not-nice house.  (b), however, does not convey such a contrast and, hence, could describe [] or [].  Cruttenden found that % of the adult listeners chose picture [] for (a) but that only % of the ten-year-olds did so.  % of them chose [] instead.  The majority in both groups consistently selected [] when they heard (b).  These results and those of other studies strongly suggest that comprehension of the contrast-marking function of an intonation contour has yet to be acquired by ten-year-olds (see also Cutler & Swinney, .  Speer & Ito, ).  Children’s difficulty in understanding intonation contours cannot be attributed solely to a limited ability to PERCEIVE pitch contours.  Much younger children are acutely sensitive to prosodic information in the input (e. g.  Fernald .  Morgan & Demuth, .  Sakkalou & Gattis, ).  In addition, in a few limited domains, children under six years of age do show some understanding of pragmatic functions marked by intonation contour (e. g.  Armstrong, .  Grassmann & Tomasello, , .  Sekerina & Trueswell, ), and they PRODUCE distinct contours that depend on the pragmatic function of their utterance (Cutler & Swinney, .  Hornby & Hass.  .  Ito, .  Thorson & Morgan, .  Wells et al. , .  Wieman, ).  At the same time, young children appear to be insensitive to intonational meanings in situations in which adult listeners derive specific pragmatic inferences effortlessly.  This raises the question.  What causes these young children difficulty.  To investigate the development of the ability to interpret intonational meanings, consider example () again.  Adult-like interpretation of intonational meanings involves the following three steps (Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg, ).  First, listeners need to identify a particular utterance as a variant of (a) or (b).  Second, they need to remember that an intonation contour such as (a) is typically associated with the speaker’s highlighting a contextual contrast.  Third, they reason about why the speaker used a particular intonation in context in arriving at a specific interpretation of the target utterance (e. g.  [It’s a very nice garden, but the house is not as nice]).  In particular, this process requires listeners to derive a contextually plausible alternative expression (namely, what the speaker could have said, e. g.  (a) vs.  (b)) and make inferences about why the speaker chose a particular expression (Grice, ).  These three steps are not necessarily acquired in order, and their developmental trajectories are most likely intertwined.  Nonetheless, the separation of intonation interpretation into these three steps is useful, as each one taps a different aspect of children’s linguistic knowledge.  The first step depends on representations of meaningful intonational contours in English, as well as cognitive and attentional resources, to process a sequence of speech as it unfolds (Ito et al. , .  Speer & Ito, ).  The second includes knowledge specific to English intonational contours, as languages differ in how much of the speaker’s pragmatic intention is conveyed prosodically and how this is accomplished (see Büring & Gutiérrez-Bravo, .  Ladd, .  Jun, , .  Vallduví, ).  The third step requires the ability to make use of contextual information to derive a conversational implicature.  Researchers have argued that preschoolers lag behind adults in using contextual information to constrain possible interpretations of an utterance (Snedeker & Trueswell, ).  Indeed, children’s intonational interpretations could differ from those of adults in any one of these steps and so result in difficulty in arriving at the intonational meaning intended.  Two important questions here are.  Which step constitutes an obstacle.  and How do children achieve adult-like interpretations.  To answer these questions, we first need to take a brief look at another domain of development with a similarly late, and protracted, development in children.  scalar implicature.  Preschoolers typically fail to derive scalar implicatures based on quantifiers (e. g.  none, some, and all) or logical words such as and vs.  or (e. g.  Chierchia, Crain, Guasti, Gualmini & Meroni, .  Musolino, .  Musolino & Lidz, .  Noveck, .  Papafragou, .  Papafragou & Musolino, .  Papafragou & Tantalou, ).  Their difficulty could be due to the level of their general processing capacity, language-specific lexical knowledge (including knowledge about relevant scales), or pragmatic ability in deriving the appropriate implicatures.  One method for sorting out these components is to provide extra scaffolding for one component and to determine whether this improves children’s performance.  Recent studies have shown that, with such an approach, the difficulty that children have with scalar implicature often lies in identifying a relevant scale.  In fact, preschoolers can manage pragmatic inferences when they are shown visually represented ad-hoc scales (Stiller, Goodman & Frank, ), familiar scales such as numbers, or even explicit descriptions.  So, when shown a picture of three animals sleeping, four-year-olds correctly reject Only the cat and the cow are sleeping (Barner, Brooks & Bale, ).  The availability of contrasting prenominal adjectives also helps children to make contrastive inferences (Horowitz & Frank, , ).  Together, these results support the hypothesis that children’s difficulty with scalar implicature lies in their limited ability to call to mind relevant alternatives in response to words such as some, rather than in their cognitive ability to compute contextually enriched pragmatic meanings.  If we apply the same logic to the interpretation of intonational contours, we can test whether preschoolers understand a contrastive intonation contour better, as in (a), when there is a linguistic alternative available in the same context.  In other words, the non-adult-like performance observed in earlier research may stem from children’s difficulty in arriving at relevant alternatives based on an intonational cue alone.  We define an alternative as an expression that is (a) lexically, syntactically, or prosodically different from a target utterance, and (b) is strongly linked to one of the possible meanings that the speaker could have expressed in that context.  If a likely alternative expression is explicit in context, preschoolers may be able to bootstrap their inference by reasoning about why the speaker used one particular expression and not another.  This type of reasoning follows from adherence to the principle of contrast (Clark, ), known for its facilitative roles in the early stages of children’s word learning.  The current study was designed to test this prediction in the domain of intonational meanings.  We also test an extended version of this prediction.  We asked.  If the availability of alternatives facilitates children’s contextual inferences, does successful comprehension contribute to the LEARNING of an intonational meaning.  By learning, we mean acquisition of the ability to identify an intended meaning based on a particular prosodic contour, even in the absence of an explicit alternative.  Contextually derived meanings may be short-lived or strongly tied to a particular setting, and thus unlikely to generalize across speakers and contexts (e. g.  Carey, .  Goodman, McDonough & Brown, .  Horst & Samuelson, .  Mervis & Bertrand, .  Wilkinson & Mazzitelli, ).  Alternatively, young children could learn to associate a particular intonation contour with some pragmatic meaning through contextually supported inferences.  In what follows, we present findings from three studies of four-year-olds.  We show that these children succeed in the appropriate pragmatic interpretation of contrast-marking intonation contours when they can leverage their interpretations against alternatives in context.  We also show, in a two-day-long study, that contextually leveraged inferences generalize across speakers and contexts, potentially contributing to longer-term acquisition of intonational meanings.  A case in point.  “It looks like an X”.  The current study focuses on the construction It looks like an X (e. g.  It looks like a zebra).  (We use italics for example words or sentences abstracted away from acoustic detail, e. g.  It is raining outside can be said as “It’s RAINING outside!”, “It IS raining outside!”, and other variations.  We use double-quotation marks for quoted speech, with phonetic and prosodic specification.  capital letters for prosodic emphasis.  and square brackets [ ] for intended interpretations. ) Depending on the listener’s construal of the intonation contour, this construction can convey either an affirmative ‘hint’ (e. g.  [(It looks like a zebra) and I think it is one]) or, with a different contour, a negative ‘warning’ (e. g.  [(It looks like a zebra) but it actually isn’t one]) (Kurumada, Brown & Tanenhaus, , submitted.  Kurumada, Brown, Bibyk, Pontillo & Tanenhaus, ).  Both interpretations are attested in spontaneous conversations between adults and children.  Hansen and Markman (), in their analysis of language uses pertinent to the appearance/reality distinction, found examples of look(s) like in  recording sessions from eight children between .  and .  and their parents (in , turns).  Of these,  instances (%, virtually all from adults) were used to indicate the identity of the object (e. g.  Child.  What’s that.  – Adult.  It looks like a bottle opener).  and  (%, again, adult uses mainly) were used to refer to the similarity in appearance of the referents mentioned (e. g.  Adult.  Yeah, that rock looks like a beehive).  By four years of age, then, children clearly have been exposed to instances of the It looks like an X construction, with an affirmative (It is an X) and comparative interpretations in context, usually offered in response to children’s What’s that questions.  Nevertheless, Hansen and Markman’s study did not examine the prosodic features of utterances, and thus does not provide any information on how often adults contradict the child’s inappropriate reference by means of “It LOOKS like X (but it isn’t one). ” Other researchers have documented adult speakers’ uses of looks like as well as is like to convey one of two different speaker intentions marked by differences in prosodic contour (Clark & Wong, ).  In () below, the adult speaker (Karen) uses They look like cows to me as a hint to categorize the referents as cows.  In (), however, Adam’s mother uses It’s like to give feedback on an erroneous word–object mapping, with an alert or warning. 