I N T R O D U C T I O N.  In learning language, young children face a challenging task.  Not only must they work out what the words they hear mean, but they must also remember these words and their referents.  Given the complexity of the speech that children hear and the limitless potential meanings of these words, this task seems almost impossible (Quine, ), and there has been much interest in the general mechanisms by which children are able to learn words.  For example, children constrain the potential meaning of words they hear according to the shape (Landau, Smith & Jones, ) and taxonomic category (Markman & Hutchinson, ) of potential referents.  Constraining the potential meaning of heard words in these ways is the ﬁrst step towards successful word learning (McMurray, Horst & Samuelson, ).  While a focus on the general mechanisms underlying word learning has helped to better understand the processes by which children acquire language, the vast variability in early language development must also be more thoroughly examined.  At the age of two, the number of diﬀerent words that a child can typically produce as reported by parents can range from  to  (Dale & Fenson, ), and a similarly wide range is demonstrated in two-year-old children’s spontaneous speech production (Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Seltzer & Lyons, ).  Nevertheless, the large majority of children with low productive vocabularies will go on to develop language normally (Desmarais, Sylvestre, Meyer, Bairati & Rouleau, .  Kelly, .  Whitehurst & Fischel, ).  Variability in vocabulary scores has been traditionally explored by examining the extrinsic factors that can serve to aﬀect a child’s language exposure, with a particular focus on the eﬀect of socioeconomic status.  Children from poorer backgrounds are consistently shown to have lower vocabularies than their better-oﬀ peers (Evans, ).  While at ﬁrst this eﬀect was understood to be due to diﬀerences in the amount of language to which a child is exposed (Hart & Risely, ), more recent research has emphasized that the quality of early language exposure is also critical (Hirsh-Pasek et al. , ).  While this research has been inﬂuentialhighlighting that the quality of language exposure impacts on language acquisition, there have also been calls for a more thorough examination of the intrinsic factors that aﬀect cognitive development (Mareschal, Johnson, Sirois, Spratling, Thomas & Westermann, ).  Children’s behavioral styles vary widely, yet the eﬀect of these variations is often neglected in explaining language development.  One intrinsic factor that has, however, been shown to aﬀect early language acquisition is temperament (Slomkowski, Nelson, Dunn & Plomin, ), speciﬁcally shyness (Coplan & Evans, ).  There have been many attempts to operationalize the construct of shyness in young children, from general constructs such as behavioral inhibition as studied in young infants (Kagan, Reznick & Snidman, ), to more speciﬁc conceptualizations focusing on the speciﬁc shy-type behaviors exhibited in certain contexts (e. g.  peer-to-peer interactions.  Gazelle, ).  The current work draws on a broader deﬁnition of shyness, based on Putnam, Gartstein, and Rothbart’s () operationalization of shyness as an enduring, biologically based individual diﬀerence characterized by discomfort in (predominantly novel) social situations, as measured via the Early Childhood Behavior Questionnaire (ECBQ).  Reports on use of the ECBQ have shown that shyness can be reliably measured in children from the age of  months (Putnam et al. , ).  The eﬀect of shyness on verbal communication has been well documented.  for example, it is known that shyness reduces children’s verbal interaction in novel and familiar contexts (e. g.  Asendorpf & Meier, ).  While this and similar research has established a clear link between shyness and language development, the effect of shyness on language has typically been measured relatively late in development, when children are at least four years old (Asendorpf & Meier, .  Broberg, Lamb, Hwang & Bookstein, .  Coplan & Weeks, .  Crozier & Badawood, .  Crozier & Perkins, .  Evans, .  Reynolds & Evans, ).  Recently, however, interest has turned to the effect of shyness on the critical early stage of language acquisition during the second year of life (Smith Watts et al. , ).  Smith Watts and colleagues examined how shyness impacts on receptive and productive language development, and reported that shyness is more strongly related to expressive than receptive vocabulary size.  These authors argued that shy children’s lower language ability during the second year of life can be explained in terms of a reticence to respond, rather than any difficulty in learning the meaning of words.  Shy children’s reticence to respond has been demonstrated in home settings (Reynolds & Evans, ) and in experimental settings (Crozier & Perkins, ), and it is also supported by research in non-Western cultures (Crozier & Badawood, ).  One critical limitation of the extant literature in support of a reticence to respond explanation is that it does not predict an effect of shyness on receptive vocabulary.  However, there are many reports of a relation between shyness and receptive vocabulary (Crozier & Badawood, .  Crozier & Hostettler, .  Crozier & Perkins, .  Rudasill, Prokasky, Tu, Frohn, Sirota & Molfese, .  Slomkowski et al. , .  Spere, Schmidt, Theall-Honey & Martin-Chang, ).  Interestingly, even Smith Watts and colleagues () found relations between receptive vocabulary and shyness, but they argued that their data supported a reticence to respond explanation because the relations between shyness and productive vocabulary were more pronounced.  Here we suggest that further insights into the ways in which shyness affects language development can be achieved by investigating the role of shyness in the processes that support word learning.  Laboratory examinations of children’s “remarkable” ability to acquire words during the second year of life often employ fast mapping tasks that demonstrate the ability to rapidly associate novel labels with novel objects (Axelsson, Churchley & Horst, .  Halberda, .  Horst & Samuelson, .  Horst, Samuelson, Kucker & McMurray, .  Spiegel & Halberda, .  Vlach & Sandhofer, ).  In these tasks, children are usually presented with a novel object alongside objects for which a label is already known and are asked to identify the object referred to by a novel pseudoword (e. g.  “Where’s the blicket. ”.  Markman & Wachtel, ).  Children begin to demonstrate the ability to pick the novel object from the age of  months (Markman, Wasow & Hansen, ), and more recent work indicates that some children may do this as early as  months (Xu, Cote & Baker, ).  Nevertheless, a closer look at the literature reveals considerable individual differences in fast mapping ability.  For example, in a study investigating the age-related development of fast mapping, Wilkinson, Ross, and Diamond () classed % of the under -month-old children in their experiment as unreliable fast mappers.  In other studies -month-old children selected the novel object only on approximately three-quarters of trials (Horst & Samuelson, .  Twomey, Ranson & Horst, ).  Similarly, in a study by Mervis and Bertrand () with –-monthold children, half of the children did not reliably select the novel object upon hearing a novel label.  Critically, children’s selection of the novel object as the referent of a novel label has been attributed to a novelty bias, which is so strong at  months that it leads children to select the novel object as the referent of even a familiar word (Samuelson, Kucker & Spencer, ).  Even at  months of age, children reliably select a familiar target object (Horst & Samuelson, ), but they also select a novel object as the referent of a novel label when competitors are nameless but pre-familiarized objects (Horst et al. , ), demonstrating the importance of novelty preference in driving children’s object selection on referent selection trials.  Individual differences in performance on referent selection trials may therefore be explained in terms of differences in novelty preference.  That novelty preference is critical in supporting referent selection would indicate that shyness could come to bear on this ability, because we know that shy children are averse to novelty (Kagan et al. , ).  This aversion to novelty could mean that shy children’s novelty preference is reduced in comparison to not-shy children.  Even once the novel object is selected as the referent of a novel word, this novel word–object mapping is not necessarily learned.  A number of studies have argued that children’s ability to select the correct referent and the ability to retain the label–object mapping over a period of time are governed by related, but separate, processes (Axelsson et al. , .  Horst & Samuelson, .  Kucker, McMurray & Samuelson, .  Munro, Baker, McGregor, Docking & Arciuli, ).  In tests of retention, children are presented with (usually three) objects for which they have fast mapped novel labels and are asked for one of these objects using its novel label.  Despite success in forming the initial word–object mappings, children often have difficulty retaining these mappings.  For example, in one typical study Horst and Samuelson () found that after a -minute delay, -month-old children were unable to select the correct object above levels that would be expected by chance.  We know that extrinsic factors can affect whether a mapping is retained.  Horst and Samuelson () found that by reinforcing the mapping by ostensively naming the object (e. g.  by pointing and labeling) after the child had made the initial word–object mapping, the likelihood that it would be retained was increased.  This finding suggested that attention to the referent during referent selection determines whether the novel word– object mapping will be retained, supported by subsequent work which found that highlighting the target object by illuminating it and dampening attention to competitors by partially covering them also increased retention (Axelsson et al. , ).  This work suggested that the attention directed toward the target during referent selection alone is not sufficient to support retention.  Again, then, shy children’s aversion to novelty could modulate their attentional pattern across the objects during referent selection, which would impact on their retention of any word–object mappings.  Children are clearly variable in their demonstration of the mechanisms that support word learning, and we suggest that shyness could explain some of this variability.  If shyness impacts on the most basic and early processes of word learning, this could help to explain the relation between shyness and language development as measured more generally (e. g.  Spere et al. , ).  Specifically, one can assume that children who are better able to focus their attention on the novel object during labeling should be better able to retain the word–object mapping.  We hypothesize that shyness can affect retention of novel word–object mappings formed via referent selection by modulating children’s attention during referent selection.  Such a hypothesis is in line with recent accounts arguing that differences in engagement with objects can explain differences in word learning and categorization of these objects (e. g.  Perry, ).  If shy children demonstrate lower levels of retention than their not-shy peers, it would mean that shyness is affecting the acquisition of language from one of its earliest stages.  the initial mapping of a label to its referent.  Such a fine-grained analysis of the effects of shyness on the formation of label– object mappings, rather than focusing solely on vocabulary size or language production, means that we can begin to understand the precise ways in which language is shaped by shyness.  In the present study, two-year-old children took part in both referent selection and retention tests of mapping novel labels to novel objects.  A sample of children who varied in their shyness completed the same referent selection trials in which they were presented with one novel object alongside two familiar objects and were asked for a novel label.  Trials were included in which children were asked for a familiar object.  After a -minute break, all children then took part in retention trials.  We also investigated whether external directing of attention to the target object via ostensive naming of targets during referent selection facilitated shy children’s retention.  <Middle>Participants.  Thirty-two typically developing -month-old children participated (M=  m,  days, SD =  days.  range =  m,  days to  m,  days.   girls and  boys).  All children were monolingual, predominantly from middle-class families of Caucasian ethnicity living in the north-west of England, UK.  Families were recruited by contacting parents who had previously indicated interest in participating in child development research.  Parents’ travel expenses were reimbursed and children were offered a storybook for participating.  Data from nine additional children were excluded from analyses due to experimenter error (n = ), parental involvement (n = ), refusal to complete the task (n = ), and the parent not returning the questionnaire (n = ).  The Early Childhood Behavior Questionnaire (ECBQ) was used to assess children’s shyness as an enduring, biologically based individual difference.  The ECBQ asks parents to rate on a scale from  to  how often their child has demonstrated particular behaviors over the previous two weeks ( = ‘never’,  = ‘all the time’), as a means of assessing the child’s score on eighteen fine-grained subdimensions of temperament.  While these subdimensions include areas such as attention focusing, activity level, and high- or low-intensity pleasure, the shyness subdimension was of particular interest for the current study.  The shyness scale consists of twelve items that assess how children react in situations that elicit shy behavior, for example “When approaching unfamiliar children playing, how often did your child watch rather than join. ” and “In situations where s/he is meeting new people, how often did your child become quiet. ”.  Each child was scored from  to  by averaging their parents’ responses to the twelve questions relating to shyness (after correcting for reverse coded questions).  A score of  is considered the least shy, and a score of  is considered the most shy.  Standardized Cronbach’s alpha for the shyness measure was . .  Once all data were collected, the median score for all children was calculated (·).  Children scoring above the median formed the shy group and those scoring less than the median formed the not-shy group.  Three children’s scores equaled the median, and they were randomly assigned to a group, ensuring equal sample size (n = ).  There were equal numbers of boys and girls (n = ) in each group.  There was no difference between groups in age (t() = ·, p = ·).  Unsurprisingly, children in the not-shy group were scored as less shy (M= ·, SD = ·) than children in the shy group (M= ·, SD = ·) (t() = –·, p < ·).  Shyness scores were calculated after the testing session had taken place, which meant that the shyness grouping of the participants was not evident during testing.  In order to examine whether ostensive naming interacts with shyness to affect referent selection and retention, eight boys and eight girls were assigned to an ostensive naming and a no ostensive naming condition.  Assignment of children to ostensive and no ostensive naming conditions occurred before it was possible to calculate a median shyness score, so children were randomly assigned to each condition prior to each testing session.  There was no difference between conditions in age (t() = –·, p = ·).  As expected by a random assignment, there were equal numbers of not-shy children in the ostensive naming (n = .   girls), and no ostensive naming (n = .   girls) conditions.  Similarly, there were equal numbers of shy children in the ostensive naming (n = .   girls) and no ostensive naming (n = .   girls) conditions. The same stimuli were used in both conditions.  Eleven objects, selected because they are easily named by -month-olds, acted as familiar objects, and consisted of animals (duck, elephant, fish, pig), vehicles (car, motorbike, helicopter), and household objects (spoon, fork, cup, and ball).  Four novel objects, selected because they are not normally familiar to month-old children, were a plastic roller, a wooden massager, a tea strainer, and a miniature dumbbell (see Figure ).  Four distinct nonwords (cheem, koba, sprock, tannin) were used to name the novel objects, taken from previous research using similar methodology (Behrend, Scofield & Kleinknecht, .  Horst & Samuelson, .  Markson & Bloom, .  Samuelson & Horst, ).  The assignment of each name to each novel object was randomized across participants.  To ensure the objects would be familiar and novel to each participant as expected, parents were shown photographs of the objects before the experiment began and confirmed their familiarity or novelty.  All objects were similar in size (approximate mean size  cm ×  cm ×  cm).  The objects were presented on a wooden tray, divided into three equal compartments for the objects to be placed.  PROCEDURE AND DESIGN.  Prior to their visit to the lab, parents completed the ECBQ, and during their visit children took part in the word learning task.  Word learning task.  Warm-up trials.  During the task children sat on their parent’s lap across a white table from the experimenter.  Once settled, the warm-up trials began.  All trials consisted of three objects being presented to the child on the tray.  For warm-up trials, the three objects were familiar and their purpose was to introduce the child to the forced-choice task, and to ensure that they understood the instructions of the experimenter.  For each trial the experimenter presented the objects and asked for the target six times (i. e.  “Wow a duck! Where’s the duck.  See the duck! Find the duck! Get the duck! Can you get the duck. ”).  The experimenter then slid the tray forward into reaching distance for the child, and gave the child the opportunity to retrieve the requested object.  If correct, the child was praised, and if incorrect, the child was corrected.  The order in which the objects were requested was randomly determined prior to testing.  The three familiar objects presented on warm-up trials were not presented in subsequent referent selection trials.  Warm-up trials continued until children had correctly selected each referent once.  The majority of children needed no more than three warm-up trials ( children needed four warm-up trials and one child needed six warm-up trials. ) Referent selection trials.  The referent selection trials began immediately after the warm-up trials.  Referent selection trials proceeded in the same manner as the warm-up trials, but differed in three ways.  First, two of the objects were familiar and one was novel.  Second, neither praise nor corrections were given following the child’s referent selection.  Third, children were offered the chance to explore the three objects for  seconds before they were asked to select an object.  During this exploration time, the three objects were presented on the tray to the child, and the child and caregiver played with the objects for  seconds.  During this exploration, parents were instructed to avoid labeling or asking for labels for the objects, and if needed the experimenter directed the child’s attention to each of the objects at least once, either by pointing at it, or if that was unsuccessful, by maneuvering it into the child’s line of vision.  Once  seconds had elapsed, the objects were returned to their positions on the tray, and the child was asked for the target object.  Once children had selected an object, it was returned to its position on the tray.  Children in the ostensive naming condition then saw the target object ostensively named (irrespective of whether they had correctly chosen the target object or not), meaning that the experimenter pointed at the target object and labeled it (e. g.  “It’s a car. ”).  Children in the no ostensive naming condition saw the experimenter point to the target object and say “There it is”.  To ensure that children in each condition heard the label an equal number of times (which was relevant for the subsequent retention test), children in the ostensive naming condition heard the label one time fewer during the initial request, by removing a labeling phrase (e. g.  “Where’s the koba. ”).  This arrangement meant that children in both conditions heard the object labeled six times.  The object label was spoken multiple times, in line with previous research (e. g.  Axelsson et al. , ).  Each child was presented with four sets of three objects, and each set was shown twice.  In one of these presentations the child was asked for a novel object, and in the other was asked for a familiar object.  The objects comprising each set and the labels assigned to each novel object were randomized across children.  The order of sets and trials was pseudorandomized, ensuring that any trial type (i. e.  familiar or novel) was not presented on more than two consecutive trials.  Retention trials.  Following the referent selection trials there was a -minute break, during which the child was offered crayons and paper for coloring.  This break was to ensure that any retention in the following trials was the product of long-term memory (following Horst & Samuelson, ). 